Hon &apos;ble D. G. R. PATNAIK , J. Baleshwar Prasad ( in all ) Versus State of Jharkhand &amp; Ors . ( in all )
Cr . M.P. Nos. 1457 , 1459 with 1460 of 2006 . decided on 31st July , 2010 .
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act , 1954 – Sections 16 ( 1 ) ( a ) ( i ) and 19 ( 2 ) -Criminal Procedure Code , 1973-Section 482-Sale of adulterated salt-Cognizance-Initial onus is on vendor and if he proves that he purchased food articles with a written warranty in prescribed form , he shall not be deemed to have committed any offence-Petitioner being vendor , has to prove that he had actually purchased seized sample of salt from manufacturer and stored the same in same state-Fact that petitioner was found selling alleged adulterated salt , is in itself , sufficient to indicate a prima facie case for offence under the Act against vendorImpugned order of cognizance cannot be faulted-Petition dismissed .
( paras 7 to 10 ) Counsel . — Mr. Kailash Pd . Deo . ( in all ) For the Petitioner ; M / s M. B. Lal , Vinod Singh ( in all ) For the State ; Mr. Deepak kr . Prasad ( in all ) For the O.P. No. 2 .
order Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned counsel for the State as also the counsel for the Opposite Party No.2 in all the three applications , which involve identical questions for determination .
2 } The present Cr . Miscellaneous Petitions have been filed under Section 482 of the CrPC by the petitioner , praying for quashing the order of cognizance , passed by the Sub-Divisional Judicial Magistrate , Deoghar for the offence under Section 16 ( 1 ) ( a ) ( i ) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act , 1954 and also against the orders of the Sessions Judge , rejecting the Cr . revision applications filed by him against the impugned orders of cognizance passed by the Magistrate .
3 } Facts relevant for the disposal of these cases are as follows :
the petitioner in all these three Cr . Miscellaneous Petition is vendor of various food articles including salt .
the complainant-Food Inspector visited the retail shop of the petitioner and found the petitioner &apos;s selling salt of different brands .
the Food Inspector purchased samples of the different brands of salt and after obtaining the petitioner &apos;s signatures on each sample , forwarded the samples for examination to the Combined Food &amp; Drugs Laboratory , Agamkuan , Patna .
the test reports of the samples , submitted by the Laboratory , confirmed that the samples of salts does not conform to the prescribed standard under Rule A. 15.01 of Appendix Bread with Rule 5 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules , 1955 .
thus , on the basis of the Laboratory Report , the complainant had concluded that the petitioner was found selling adulterated salt . ﻿
the petitioner had pleaded that different brands of salt of which the seized samples were prepared , were neither produced nor manufactured by him .
rather , the various brands of salt was produced from different manufacturers and he had believed bona fidely in good faith that the salt , which was supplied to him by the manufacturers did conform to the prescribed standard as laid down under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules .
in support of his claim , he had also produced bills / vouchers of purchase , issued by the purported manufacturers .
on the basis of the above disclosure , the Food Inspector submitted separate Prosecution Reports for prosecuting the petitioner as also the manufacturers , named by the petitioner , for the offence under Section 16 ( 1 ) ( a ) ( i ) of the Food Adulteration Act , 1954 , after obtaining due sanction from the local Health authority .
on the basis of the Prosecution Reports , the learned court below took cognizance of the offence , directing issuance of summons to the petitioner to face trial in each of the cases , being aggreived with the orders of cognizance , the petitioner filed separate Cr . revision applications before the Sessions Judge , but the same were dismissed .
4 } The petitioner has assailed the impugned orders of both the courts below on several grounds though , learned counsel for the petitioner has mainly stressed upon the ground that since admittedly , the petitioner is not the manufacturer of salt , the samples of which was collected from his possession , he is protected under the provisions of Section 19 ( 2 ) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act and he cannot be prosecuted for the alleged offence .
5 } Learned counsel for the State , on the other hand , would argue that the facts , as stated in the Prosecution &apos;s Report would amply demonstrate that the petitioner was found selling adulterated salt .
under such circumstances , the initiation of the Prosecution against the petitioner for the offence under the provisions of the P.F.A. Act , cannot be said to be illegal .
learned counsel submits that the prosecution of the petitioner is based entirely on the fact that he was found selling adulterated salt and merely because on the basis of the statements of the petitioner , the manufacturer has also been named as an accused , in itself , would not indicated that the petitioner &apos;s claim of his defence , has been accepted .
6 } For better appreciation of the rival submissions , the provisions of Section 19 ( 2 ) of the P.F.A. Act , 1954 may be noted :
191 &#91; ( 2 ) A vendor shall not be deemed to have committed an offence pertaining to sale of any adulterated or misbranded article of food if he proved .
( a ) that he purchased the article of food
( I ) in a case where a licence is prescribed for the sale thereof , from a duly licensed manufacturer , distributor or dealer ; ﻿ ( ii ) in any other case , from any manufacturer , distributor or dealer with a written warranty in the prescribed form ; and
( b ) that the article of food while in his possession was properly stored and that he sold it in the same state as he purchased it . &#93; &quot;
7 } From a bare reading of the provision , it would be manifest that the initial onus is on the vendor and if he proves that he purchased the food articles with a written warranty in the prescribed form , he shall not be deemed to have committed any offence .
this onus is discharged by proving that the vendor had purchased the article of food with a written warranty in the prescribed form by a duly licensed manufacturer , distributor or a dealer .
the provision also lays down that besides proving that he had purchased the article of food from a duly licensed manufacturer , distributor or dealer with written warranty in the prescribed form , the onus also lies on the vendor to prove that the article of food while in his possession , was properly stored and that he had sold it in the same state as he purchased it .
8 } The requirement of proof , as envisaged in Section 19 ( 2 ) of the Act , implies that such proof can be brought in evidnece only in course of trail and not at the stage of taking cognizance of the offence .
the fact that the petitioner was found selling the alleged adulterated salt , is in itself , sufficient to indicate a prima facie case for the offence under the Act against the vendor and in this view of the matter , the impugned order of cognizance cannot be faulted .
9 } From the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner , it appears that the insistence is on dispensing with the requirement to prove the defence raised by the petitioner on the ground that such proof is not required since the fact that the petitioner had purchased the salt from the manufacturer has been admitted by the Prosecution .
the argument of the learned counsel is not tenable .
the fact that the petitioner being vendor , has taken the defence as may be available to him under Section 19 ( 2 ) of the Act , only makes it necessary for the prosecution to join the manufacturer and the distributor also in the same trial .
such joint trial being envisaged under Section 20 A of the Act .
thus , the mere fact that the manufacturer has also been made as co-accused in itself , does not indicated that the prosecution has accepted in toto , the defence as would be available to the petitioner under the provisions of Section 19 ( 2 ) of the Act .
the petitioner has to prove that he had actually purchased the seized sample of salt from the manufacturer and further , that he had stored the article of food in the same state as it was purchased by him .
the manufacturer , who is claimed to have given warranty shall be entitled to participate in the hearing and to give evidence .
thus , the benefit of sub-section 2 of Section 19 of the Act , can be availed by the petitioner on the article of the Food only if he has proved that he has sold the salt in the original condition as he had purchased from the manufacturer .
the satisfaction referred to in this Section , is therefore , to be reached by the Court on the basis of the materials available on record and no other Rule or any other guidelines can be laid down regarding the data and the quantum of material necessary or sufficient to reach the satisfaction . ﻿
10 . in the light of the facts and circumstances of the case and the discussions made above , I do not find any illegality or impropriety in the impugned orders of cognizance , as passed by the Magistrate .
all these Cr . Miscellaneous petition &#91; Cr . M.P. Nos. 1457 , 1459 and 1460 of 2006 &#93; are accordingly dismissed .
Hon &apos;ble JAYA ROY , J. Md . Aftab Ansari Versus State of Jharkhand Cr . revision No. 121 of 2010 . decided on 3rd November , 2010 .
juvenile Justice ( Care and Protection of Children ) Act , 2000 Section 7-A-Prosecution u / s 376 , IPC-Rejection of plea of juvenilityAs per age assessed by Medical Board , petitioner was below 18 years of age on the date FIR was lodged-Impugned order set aside-Court below directed to send the case to Juvenile Justice Board to proceed further according to Juvenile Act .
( para 8 ) Counsel . — M / s P. P. N. Roy , Tarun Kumar Sinha , For the Petitioners ; Mr. T. Kabiraj , For the State ; Mrs. Rita Kumari , For the Informant .
order Jaya Roy , J.-Petitioner has filed the instant revision application against the order dated 15.1.2010 passed by the Judicial Magistrate in connection with T.R. No. 579 of 2010 arising out of Birni P.S. case No. 68 of 2008 &amp; G.R. No. 1411 of 2008 , whereby , the petitioner &apos;s application filed for declaring him juvenile , has been rejected .
2 } The prosecution case , in brief , is that the informant Taibun Khatoon has filed a written report on 29.6.2008 stating therein that 5-6 months ago in the month of Aghan when she was alone in her house as her mother had gone to the field for work and her father was at Mangalore , all of a sudden Md . Aftab Ansari ( the present petitioner ) aged about 20 years , came to her and locked the door from inside and committed rape upon her .
it is also alleged that the accused petitioner has given threatening her not to disclose about the incidence to any person .
but after three months when she came to know that she was pregnant , she informed her mother about the incident .
ultimately , she filed the written report before the Superintendent of Police at Birni Police Station , Giridih .
3 } On the basis of the said written report , a case has been registered against the petitioner namely Md . Aftab Ansari under Section 376 IPC
4 } The petitioner voluntarily surrendered before the Court of C.J.M. , Giridih on 24th July 2009 and filed an application along with the various educational certificates claiming himself as juvenile , as according to his certificates , his date of birth is 15.5.1993 .
the court below has disbelieved the documents filed by the ﻿ petitioner and referred the case of the petitioner to the Medical Board for assessment of his age .
after examining the petitioner on 16.9.2009 , the Medical Board assessed his age as 18 to 19 years .
5 } Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the court below refused to declare him as juvenile without calculating his age properly , even according to the age assessed by the Medical Board .
he has further contended that admittedly , the Medical Board has assessed his age on 16.9.2009 as 18 to 19 years .
as the FIR was lodged on 29.6.2008 , in which , the date of the offence alleged as 5 to 6 months before the date of the submission of the FIR , therefore , the petitioner was definitely below 18 years of age even on the date of lodging the FIR
6 } Learned counsel for the petitioner has further contended that the trial court has assessed the age of the petitioner by his eye-estimation which is absolutely illegal and arbitrary .
7 } Learned counsel appearing for the informant has contended that the trial court after seeing the petitioner , has given his finding that the petitioner is an adult .
he has further pointed out that the petitioner has given birth of a child .
therefore , he cannot be treated as a juvenile .
therefore , there is no illegality in the order passed by the court below and this revision application is fit to be dismissed .
8 } In the impugned order , I find that the Medical Board has assessed the petitioner &apos;s age as 18 to 19 years on 16.9.2009 .
admittedly , FIR was lodged on 29.6.2008 , therefore , even according to the report of the Medical Board , if the age of the petitioner is taken as 18 on 16.9.2009 , he was definitely below 18 years of age on the date of lodging the FIR i.e. on 29.6.2008 .
without going into the genuineness of the documents filed by the petitioner and without considering the merit of the evidence of the witnesses examined on behalf of the petitioner , from the medical report , it can be said that the petitioner was juvenile on the date of the alleged occurrence and even on the date of the lodging the FIR against the petitioner .
therefore , I set aside the impugned order dated 15.1.2010 passed by the Judicial Magistrate , Giridih passed in T.R. No. 579 of 2010 and allow this revision application and also direct the court below to send this case to the Juvenile Justice Board to proceed further according to the Juvenile Justice ( Care and Protection ) of Children Act .
9 } Office is directed to send back the entire lower court records immediately to the court concerned .
Hon &apos;ble D. G. R. PATNAIK , J. Jai Kumar &amp; Anr . Versus State of Jharkhand &amp; Anr .
Cr . M.P. No. 1021 of 2006 . decided on 13th August , 2010 .
Indian Penal Code , 1860 — Sections 406 , 420 , 467 , 468 , 471 and 34 – Criminal Procedure Code , 1973 – Section 482 — Cheating and forgery-Cognizance-Petitioners are partners of a firm who availed cash credit facility from Bank and thereafter committed irregularity in operating loan account-Petitioners fraudulently removed stock and dishonestly misappropriated sale proceeds of stock without repaying loan amount to Bank-Dispute relates to a commercial transaction and breach of contract-Complainant has been labouring under a misconceived belief that since stock has been hypothecated in favour of Bank , Bank is deemed to be owner of stock and by virtue of such ownership , stock was entrusted to petitioners giving them domain over stock-Hypothecation creates only a charge over property and right in favour of creditor to take possession in event of default on part of debtor and hypothecator- None of offences for which Court below has taken cognizance is made out-Impugned order quashed .
( paras 7 to 13 ) Case laws . — 2006 ( 3 ) SCC ( Cri ) 188 — Referred to .
counsel . — M / s Sanjeev Thakur , R. P. Sinha , For the Petitioner ; A.P.P. , For the State ; Mr. S. J. Roy , For the O.P. No.-2.
order Heard counsel for the petitioners and counsel for the State .
2 } The petitioners have filed the instant application for quashing the entire criminal proceeding pending before the court below vide G.R. Case No. 983 / 04 arising out of Bokaro Sector IV P.S. Case No. 82 / 04 including the order of cognizance dated 6.5.2005 passed by the Chief Judicial Magistrate , Bokaro whereby cognizance for the offences under Sections 406 , 420 , 467 , 468 , 471 and 34 of the Indian Penal Code was taken against the petitioners and they have been called upon to appear and face trial in the case .
it may be observed that by an interim order passed in this case , the further proceeding in the case pending against the petitioners before the court below has been stayed .
3 } Facts of the case stated briefly , relevant for the disposal of this case are as follows :
a case was registered on the basis of a written report filed by the informant Manager of the Punjab National Bank .
the allegations in the FIR are that the petitioner , being partners of a firm namely M / s . Jai Steels , had obtained a loan of Rs . 15 lakhs from the Informant Bank on 27.9.2001 and had availed cash credit facility to the extent of the loan amount and by way of security , had hypothecated their running stock with the Bank , in addition to furnishing guarantee of a guarantor namely Smt . Jaleshwari Devi .
as per the terms of loan and terms of hypothecation , the borrowers were required to deposit the sale proceeds of the stock promptly in the loan account .
thereafter , the loan account used to be operated smoothly and regularly but since after July , 2003 , the borrowers were irregular in depositing the sale proceeds . ﻿
such irregularity continued despite repeated letters and warnings and as on 31.1.2004 , an outstanding balance of Rs . 16,93,478 / stood in the loan account of the petitioners .
it is alleged that the officials of the Bank visited the godown and office premises of the petitioners &apos; firm on 16.1.2004 and on inspection they found the entire stock missing .
on the allegations that the petitioners have fraudulently removed the stock and dishonestly misappropriated the sale proceeds of the stock without repaying loan amount to the Bank , and have thereby committed criminal misappropriation , criminal breach of trust and offence under Sections 467 and 468 of the Indian Penal Code .
the case was lodged at the Police Station and the criminal proceeding initiated against the petitioners .
4 } The petitioners have assailed the FIR and the entire criminal proceeding including the impugned order of cognizance on the ground that no criminal prosecution could be initiated against the petitioners on the basis of the allegations and if at all , the facts may constitute a civil dispute for breach of contract and by no stretch of imagination can the petitioners be saddled with any criminal liability .
5 } Learned counsel for the petitioner explains that even as per the admitted facts , though a hypothecation agreement was executed by the petitioners in favour of the Bank in respect of the stock but there is noting in the hypothecation agreement which would make it obligatory for the petitioners to show the exact quantity of stock every month .
this was because the cash credit facility was sanctioned only for the purpose of purchase of steel materials from BSL and to sell the same in the open market and this being a daily affair , it was never contemplated that the petitioners should declare the specific minimum stock to the Bank .
learned counsel explains further , that the cash credit facility is not a loan in lien , Rather , it is a cash credit loan and the hypothecation agreement does not create any power to the Bank for restraining the petitioners from selling the stock .
furthermore , merely because a charge has been created on the stock , the creditor has no right of ownership of the goods .
rather , the ownership of goods remains with the borrowers .
to buttress his arguments , learned counsel refers to and relies upon the judgement of the Supreme Court in the case of Indian Oil Corporation vs. NEPC India Ltd . &amp; Others , 2006 ( 3 ) SCC ( Cri ) 188 .
6 } Learned counsel for the Opposite Party No. 2 , on the other hand , would argue that from the perusal of the allegations in the FIR , it would be apparent that the petitioners had in fact no intention to repay the loan amount and with dishonest intention , they had obtained loan from the Bank .
furthermore , the petitioners , being obliged under the terms of agreement to deposit the sale proceeds of the stock regularly , have misappropriated the sale proceeds of the stock .
this , according to the learned counsel , not only amounts to criminal misappropriation of money but also criminal breach of trust . ﻿
7 . having heard the counsel for the parties and having gone through the materials available on record including the contents of the FIR , I find that admittedly , the main grievance of the informant Bank Manager is that the petitioners have committed breach of contract by failing to deposit the sale proceeds of the stock and by failing to repay the loan amount as per the terms of contract .
such claim is based on the basis of the hypothecation agreement under which the running stock of the petitioners &apos; firm was hypothecated .
from the admitted facts , it is apparent that the dispute relates to a commercial transaction and breach of contract .
it further appears that the complainant has been labouring under a misconceived belief that since the stock has been hypothecated in favour of the Bank , the Bank is deemed to be the owner of the stock and by virtue of such ownership , the stock was entrusted to the petitioners giving them domain over the stock .
8 } It is well settled that when a property is hypothecated to the creditor , the ownership and possession of the property hypothecated , remains with the debtor only , the creditor having neither ownership nor beneficial interest in the property .
the hypothecation creates only a charge over the property and a right in favour of the creditor to take possession in the event of default on the part of the debtor and hypothecator .
this is the view expressed by the Supreme Court in the case of Indian Oil Corporation ( supra ) .
the claim of the informant that the petitioners / borrowers could not have sold the stock on account of the charge being created in favour of the Bank , appears to be misconceived and misleading .
admittedly , the ownership and dominion over the stock continued to remain with the petitioners .
9 } From the facts admitted , the essential ingredients of dishonest misappropriation of movable property as defined under Section 403 as also under Section 405 IPC , are conspicuously lacking .
10 } No doubt , a commercial transaction or dispute may also involve criminal offence but only if the essential ingredients of the criminal offences are made out .
where allegations in the FIR / Complaint are taken at their face value , disclose exclusively a civil dispute for which the civil remedy is available or has been availed , the initiation of criminal proceeding on the same facts , would amount to abuse of the process of the court and in such cases , as declared by the Supreme Court in the case of Indian Oil Corporation ( supra ) , the person who had initiated the criminal proceeding frivolously with ulterior motive , should be penalized .
the test is whether the allegations in the complaint disclose a criminal offence or not .
11 } In the present case , even going by the entire allegations in the FIR , none of the offences for which the court below has taken cognizance , is made out .
the creditor Bank being aggrieved with the fact that the petitioners being the borrowers , have defaulted in repaying loan , may have a legal remedy by way of filing a civil suit for recovery of the loan amount but cannot be allowed to abuse the process of court in order to create a pressure upon the borrowers to repay the amount . ﻿
12 . from the perusal of the impugned order of cognizance , it appears that the learned court below has failed to appreciate the admitted facts of the case even as declared in the FIR and has proceeded to take cognizance of the offence in a most mechanical manner without application of judicial mind .
13 } In the light of the facts and circumstances and the discussions made above , I find merit in this application .
this application is allowed .
accordingly , the impugned order of cognizance as also the entire criminal proceeding pending against the petitioners before the court below vide G.R. Case No. 983 / 04 arising out of Bokaro Sectori P.S. Case No. 82 / 04 , is hereby quashed .
Hon &apos;ble AMARESHWAR SAHAY and D. K. SINHA , JJ . State of Jharkhand ( in 1 ) Amir Chakrabarty @ Amit Chakrabarty ( in 392 ) Versus Amit Chakerborty @ Amir Chakerborty @ Guddu ( in 1 )
State of Jharkhand ( in 392 )
death Reference No. 01 of 2010 with Cr . appeal ( D.B. ) No. 392 of 2010 . decided on 17th August , 2010 .
against the judgment of conviction dated 13.4.2010 and order of sentence recorded on 15.4.2010 by Sri Vijay Shanker Singh , learned 1st Additional Sessions Judge-cum-Special Judge , Dhanbad in Sessions Trial No. 131 / 06 .
Indian Penal Code , 1860-Sections 376 , 302 and 301-S.C. and S.T. ( Prevention of Atrocities ) Act , 1989-Sections 3 ( 2 ) ( v ) and 3 ( 2 ) ( vi ) Rape and murder-Death sentence-Rape and murder of six years young girl-Dead body thrown in water with intention to screen itProsecution case corroborated by medical evidence-Ingredient required for a case based on circumstantial evidence well proved by prosecution which does not call for further scruitiny-However , appellant at relevant time of occurrence was at an early age of 20 and there was chance and occasion for his rehabilitation as no criminal antecedent was reported against him-Instant case does not come within category of rarest of rare cases — Conviction upheld but death sentence modified to rigorous imprisonment for life .
( paras 9 to 14 ) Case laws.- ( 1980 ) 2 SCC 684 ; ( 1994 ) 2 SCC 220 ; ( 2005 ) 10 SCC 322 — Relied on .
counsel . — Mr. Indrajit Sinha , For the Appellant-Accused ; Mr. Ravi Prakash , For the State .
D.K. Sinha , J. — The death reference under Section 366 ( 1 ) Code of Criminal Procedure and the Criminal Appeal aforesaid of the sole appellant Amir Chakrabarty @ Amit Chakrabarty under Section 374 ( 2 ) of the Code of Criminal Procedure , arising out of common judgment of conviction and order of sentence in Jorapokhar P.S. Case No.264 / 05 , corresponding to Sessions Trial No. 131 / 06 are taken up together by which the appellant Amir Chakrabarty @ Amit Chakrabarty was ﻿ convicted under Sections 376 / 302 / 201 of the Indian Penal Code as also under Sections 3 ( 2 ) ( v ) and 3 ( 2 ) ( vi ) of the S.C. and S.T. ( Prevention of Atrocities ) Act , 1989 .
apart from sentence of imprisonment awarded to the appellant in different counts , under Sections 376 / 201 of the Indian Penal Code , he was awarded death sentence for his conviction under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code by Sri Vijay Shanker Singh , the learned 1st Additional Sessions Judge-cum-Special Judge , Dhanbad on 15.4.2010 .
2 } Prosecution story in short was that Jorapokhar P.S. Case No.264 / 05 was registered on 27.12.2005 on the basis of the Fardbeyan of the informant P.W.-13 Astami Devi recorded on the same day .
she narrated therein that on 26.12.2005 at about 7 : 30 o &apos;clock in the night her daughter Urmila Kumari , 8 years since deceased ) was doing her self study with her companion Rukmani Kumari , about 6 years at Mansa temple .
at that time the informant was indulged in gossiping with her co-sister Golfi Devi , Bibi Bauri and Sakhi Devi sitting there by the side of the said temple at some distance .
in the meantime , Amir Chakrabarty @ Amit Chakrabarty came to Mansa Mandir and took away her daughter Urmila Kumari by persuading that her sister-in-law was calling to serve her bread to eat .
when Urmila Kumari did not return back for a long time , the informant asked her son Raju Bauri to go and search her .
she further narrated that her co-sister and daughter-in-law also came out in search of Urmila Kumari in the neighbour .
during course of search , Amir Chakrabarty @ Amit Chakrabarty was seen coming from the river side .
when he was confronted to answer the whereabouts of Urmila Kumari , he became nervous and ran away .
some of the witnesses chased and followed him , whereas other set of witnesses went towards river in search and found the dead body of Urmila Kumari on the bank of river .
the body was nude and pus like substance was coming out from her private part .
the informant alleged that Amir Chakrabarty @ Amit Chakrabarty committed murder of her daughter after ravishing her and threw the dead body in the water with the intention to screen it .
informant put her signature on her fardbeyan which was attested by P.W.-2 Josana Devi .
a case was registered for the offence under Sections 376 / 302 / 201 of the Indian Penal Code against Amir Chakrabarty @ Amit Chakrabarty on her Fardbeyan and after investigation , the Investigating Officer submitted charge-sheet against him under Sections 376 / 302 / 201 Indian Penal Code as also under Section 3 ( xii ) of the S.C. and S.T. ( Prevention of Atrocities ) Act , 1989 .
3 } Learned counsel Mr. Indrajit Sinha submitted that there was no direct evidence and the appellant was convicted only on the basis of suspicion raised against him and the circumstantial evidence .
the death sentence that was awarded to him was without considering the settled principles of law and the instant case did not come within the category of the rarest of rare case .
learned trial Judge failed to appreciate that there was vital contradiction in the statements of the prosecution witnesses , as such , no reliance could have been placed upon such statements .
sentence awarded to the appellant was excessive and too harsh to be executed and the learned trial Judge failed to take into consideration the mitigating circumstances that there was no eyewitness of the occurrence .
learned trial Judge further erred by relying upon the evidence of last seen , which was not conclusive in nature , The prosecution failed to connect that it was none other than the appellant Amit Chakrabarty who committed murder and the ﻿ prosecution further failed to point out motive of the appellant behind such killing .
the post mortem report did not entail that victim was ravished before her death .
therefore , there was missing link of the chain of circumstances and it could not be proved that the appellant committed murder of a minor girl .
advancing his argument Mr. Sinha the learned counsel further explained that there was no material on the record to attract the conviction of the appellant for the charge under Sections 3 ( 2 ) ( v ) and 3 ( 2 ) ( vi ) of the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe ( Prevention of Atrocities ) Act , 1989 as it was no where alleged that the alleged offence was committed only because Urmila Kumari was a girl who belonged to Scheduled Caste .
4 } Advancing his argument , learned counsel submitted that the instant case does not come within the category of the rarest of rare case in the facts and circumstances of the case if at all the complicity of the appellant has been found to be proved against the various charges framed against him including one under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code .
appellant at the relevant time was in his young age of 20 , illiterate man without job and having no criminal antecedent at all .
no instance has been brought on the record by the prosecution in course of trial that he was criminal bent of mind or incorrigible on account of his past conduct .
no special reason has been assigned by the trial Judge while awarding the extreme sentence of capital punishment to the appellant except by mentioning that the act of the appellant was like a beast , who committed rape on a helpless minor girl to appease the lust of his sex and in that manner , he displayed extreme form of bestiality .
Mr. Sinha submitted that even if such observation of the trial Court is accepted for the argument &apos;s sake , the instant case does not come within the category of the rarest of rare case .
5 } The Apex Court in Bachan Singh vs. State of Punjab , reported in ( 1980 ) 2 SCC 684 devised a guideline by discussing mitigating factors as the test for awarding extreme penalty to a convict and mitigating factors were suggested for consideration which are as follows :
mitigating circumstances .
in the exercise of its discretion in the above cases , the court shall take into account the following circumstances :
( 1 ) That the offence was committed under the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance .
( 2 ) The age of the accused .
if the accused is young or old , he shall not be sentenced to death .
( 3 ) The probability that the accused would not commit criminal acts of violence as would constitute a continuing threat to society .
( 4 ) The probability that the accused can be reformed and rehabilitated .
the State shall by evidence prove that the accused does not satisfy Conditions ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) above .
( 5 ) That in the facts and circumstances of the case the accused believed that he was morally justified in committing the offence .
( 6 ) That the accused acted under the duress or domination of another person . ﻿
( 7 ) That the condition of the accused showed that he was mentally defective and that the said defect impaired his capacity to appreciate the criminality of his conduct . &quot;
6 } Considering the above suggestion , the court may find that the appellant was only 20 years old , quite young and there was every chance of his reformation and rehabilitation .
it can well be inferred that the offence alleged was committed , under the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance , by the appellant which needs consideration and in the alternative , the death sentence may be commuted and modified into imprisonment for life for the conviction of the appellant under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code .
7 } Having regard to the totality of the facts and circumstances of the case , we find that P.W.-1 Golfi Devi , P.W.-2 Josana Devi , P.W.-7 Sakhi Devi and P.W.-10 Rukmani Kumari ( child witness ) were consistent that the appellant Amir Chakrabarty @ Amit Chakrabarty had taken away Urmila Kumari , a girl aged about 8 years , while she was doing her self study on 26.12.2005 at about 7 : 30 p.m. at Mansa temple .
at that time , the victim Urmila Kumari was doing her self study with P.W.-10 Rukmani Kumari and her mother P.W.-13 Astami Devi was indulged in gossiping , sitting at some distance with other witnesses when the appellant came to Mansa temple and took away Urmila Kumari by persuading that her sister-in-law was calling to serve her bread to eat .
when Urmila Kumari did not return back for a long time , mother P.W.-13 Astami Devi suspected some foul play and asked her son P.W.-6 Raju Bauri to go and search his sister Urmila Kumari .
the other witnesses also admitted that they had also come out in search of the girl .
in the same sequence , the appellant was seen coming and when called upon to explain the whereabouts of Urmila Kumari to whom he had taken away with him , he started running .
he was apprehended by the witnesses after some time in whose presence he confessed his guilt and that he ashamed for what he did with Urmila Kumari .
learned trial Judge relied upon the extra-judicial confession of this appellant which was relevant and further relied upon his confessional statement before the police which led to discovery of the panty on the bank of river where he did commit rape and that panty was identified by the mother P.W.13 Astami Devi that it belonged to Urmila Kumari and the seizure list was proved .
the statement of child witness P.W.-10 Rukmani Kumari needs consideration , who testified before the trial Court that she was doing her self study with Urmila Kumari at the relevant time of occurrence on 26.12.2005 at about 7 : 30 p.m. whereas the other witnesses including the mother of Urmila were sitting at some distance and gossiping .
in the meantime , Amir Chakrabarty @ Amit Chakrabarty came there and asked Urmila to accompany him as her sister-inlaw was calling to serve her bread to eat .
when Urmila did not return back for a long time , her mother Astami Devi asked her son Raju to go and search Urmila .
during search Raju proceeded towards joria ( water canal ) where he found the appellant coming .
when the witnesses asked about the whereabouts of Urmila , she narrated that Amit Chakrabarty started running with the intention to escape from the place .
she along with other witnesses proceeded ahead and found the nude dead body of Urmila between the two boulders .
she further testified that Amit was brought by the witnesses at the place of recovery of the dead body .
she stood to the test of cross-examination and credibility of her testimony could not be shaken in the ﻿ cross-examination .
she was the only witness , who was produced and examined on behalf of the prosecution , who admitted that the appellant took away the girl Urmila Kumari in her presence while they were doing their self studies together at Mansa temple .
8 } We further find from the evidence on the record that the autopsy of Urmila was held by P.W.-14 Dr. Shailendra Kumar , Associate Professor in the Department of Forensic Medicine at P.M.CH. , Dhanbad on 27.12.2005 at about 11 : 30 a.m. who found the following ante mortem wounds on external examination of the deceased :
( 1 ) Abrasions ( a ) 1 / 2&apos;x1 / 4 &apos; on the left chik ( b ) 1 / 2 x 1 / 4 &quot; just below the left angle of mouth ( c ) 1 / 4&apos;x1 / 4&apos;on left side fround of chin ( d ) 1&apos;x1 / 2&apos;on the upper portion front of neck ( e ) 1 / 4&apos;x1 / 4 &apos; just above the right angle of lower jaw ( f ) 1 / 2&apos;x1 / 4 &apos; in the inner aspect of right elbow
( II ) A single linier serach about 3 / 4 &apos; long situated on the upper part of front of forearm going downward and outward .
( iii ) Bruise of red colour with swelling about 1 / 4 &quot; diameter on the inner surface upper leap in the middle .
( iv ) Two small semi lunner nail marks on the left groin .
( V ) Hymen was found bruised and congested
( VI ) Libia majora and libia minora were found bruised , swollen and congested on both sides .
on dissection Acchymosis was found subcutaneous tissue on the front side of neck .
left side of heart was empty and right side was full of dark fluid blood .
stomach contained about 150 gm of rice
bladder was empty and all internal organs was found congested .
time elapsed since death 12 to 18 hrs .
cause of death : - death was due to throttling and the deceased was sexually assaulted before strangulation .
9 } The expert opinion of the Doctor very clearly indicated that the appellant tried to ravish the minor girl and caused injuries as indicated above .
as per statement of the Doctor , the hymen of the girl was found bruised and congested .
her libia majora and libia minora were found bruised , swollen and congested on both sides which conclusively indicated that the victim sustained injuries in her private part because of penetration .
the Doctor who held autopsy was of clear opinion that death was due to throttling and deceased was sexually assaulted before strangulation .
postmortem report was proved and marked Ext.-2. ﻿
10 . we find that the main thrust of the argument advanced on behalf of the appellant was that the instant case did not come within the category of the rarest of rare case so as to award death sentence to the appellant .
we subscribe to the view taken by the Hon &apos;ble Apex Court in Bachan Singh &apos;s case ( supra ) discussed hereinabove .
instant case is based upon circumstantial evidence and it is settled law that the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn have not only to be fully established but also that all the circumstances so established should be of a conclusive nature and consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused .
at the same time , the chain of the evidence must be so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for the belief consistent with the innocence of the accused .
it is further held by the Apex Court in Dhananjoy Chatterjee alias Dhana vs. State of W. B. , reported in ( 1994 ) 2 Supreme Court Cases 220 that legally established circumstances and not merely indignation of the court can form the basis of conviction and the more serious the crime , the greater should be the care taken to scrutinize the evidence lest suspicion takes the place of proof .
11 } In the instant case , we find that the ingredient required for a case based on circumstantial evidence is well proved by the prosecution which does not call for further scrutiny .
however , the fact remains as to whether the instant case comes within the category of the rarest of rare case or not ?
at the same time , we find that the appellant at the relevant time of occurrence was at an early age of 20 and there was chance and occasion for his rehabilitation as no criminal antecedent was reported against him .
no doubt , the appellant had committed a crime of most heinous nature as he committed rape and caused death of a female child , aged about only 8 years , but at the same time we are of the considered view , in view of the discussions made hereinbefore , that instant case does not come within the category of the rarest of rare case .
12 } Supreme Court of India in Rahul alias Raosaheb vs. State of Maharashtra , reported in ( 2005 ) 10 Supreme Court Cases 322 observed ,
4 } We have considered all the relevant aspects of the case .
it is true that the appellant committed a serious crime in a very ghastly manner but the fact that he was aged 24 years at the time of the crime , has to be taken note of .
even though , the appellant had been in custody since 27-11-1999 we are not furnished with any report regarding the appellant either by any probationary officer or by the jail authorities .
the appellant had no previous criminal record , and nothing was brought to the notice of the Court .
it cannot be said that he would be a menace to the society in future .
considering the age of the appellant and other circumstances , we do not think that the penalty of death be imposed on him .
5 } In the result , we confirm the conviction of the appellant on all the counts but for the sentence of death imposed on him under Section 302 IPC , we commute the death sentence to life imprisonment . &quot;
13 } In the facts and circumstances , upholding conviction of the appellant and sentence awarded to him under Sections 376 / 201 of the Indian Penal Code as also under Sections 3 ( 2 ) ( v ) and 3 ( 2 ) ( vi ) of the S.C. and S.T. ( Prevention of Atrocities ) Act , 1989 , the death sentence awarded to the appellant for his ﻿ conviction under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code is modified into one under rigorous imprisonment for life .
14 } With this modification in the sentence , the appeal of the appellant is dismissed and the death reference forwarded by the learned 1st Additional Sessions Judge-cum-Special Judge , Dhanbad under Section 366 ( 1 ) Code of Criminal Procedure is not confirmed .
AMARESHWAR Sahay , J.-I agree .
Hon &apos;ble D. G. R. PATNAIK , J. R. S. Singh @ Rama Shankar Singh &amp; Ors . ( in 1653 &amp; 1654 ) Baldeo Prasad Sharma &amp; Anr . ( in 1631 &amp; 1652 ) Versus State of Jharkhand &amp; Ors . ( in all )
Cr . M.P. Nos. 1631 , 1652 , 1653 with 1654 of 2009 . decided on 31st July , 2010 .
Indian Forest Act , 1927-Sections 33 and 63-Criminal Procedure Code , 1973 – Section 482 — Encroachment upon protected forest landCognizance-Petitioners were admittedly not present at place of occurrence while alleged act of construction work was being carried out-On the basis of same facts and cause of action , Forest Department had initiated a proceeding under Bihar Public Land Encroachment Act against petitioners which proceeding was quashed by High Court in view of disputed title-There being genuine dispute over right and title , criminal proceedings against petitioners not warranted in law-State can pursue remedy in suit / appeal before Civil Court-Impugned order quashedPetition allowed .
( paras 7 to 13 ) Case laws . — 2005 ( 3 ) JCR 464 ( Jhr ) -Applied ; AIR 1966 SC 1847 ; ( 2008 ) 5 SCC 668 — Referred to .
counsel . — M / s Delip Jerath , Indrajeet Sinha , For the Petitioners ; M / s Rajiv Ranjan Mishra , A. B. Mahato , Amaresh Kumar , For the State .
order Since the common issues are involved in all these four cases , they are taken up for disposal by this common order .
2 } Heard counsel for the petitioners and the counsel for the State .
3 } Invoking the inherent powers of this court under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure , petitioners have prayed for quashing the entire criminal proceedings including the order of cognizance passed by the court below for the offences under sections 33 and 63 of the Indian Forest Act , 1927 , which are pending against them .
4 } The brief facts , relevant for the disposal of these cases , are as follows :
on the basis of reports submitted by the Forest Guard claiming that a brick boundary wall was being illegally constructed by the employees of the petitioners ﻿ company by engaging labourers , over forest land , the Forester , Chas Forest Division , Bokaro , after verifying the informations received , submitted offence reports addressed to the Divisional Forest Officer , Bokaro Forest Division and on the basis of which , separate prosecution reports were filed before the Chief Judicial Magistrate , Bokaro , on the allegations that the petitioners , without obtaining prior permission from the forest department , have not only encroached upon the protected forest land , but have also started raising illegal construction over the same .
on the basis of the prosecution reports , cognizance was taken by the Chief Judicial Magistrate , Bokaro against the alleged offenders namely , the present petitioners in each of the cases , for the offences under Sections 33 and 63 of the Indian Forest Act .
the case of the prosecution is common in each of the cases is that vast portions of land comprising 133.38 acres including lands under plot nos . 1159 , 1389 , 1428 , 1289 , 1120 and 1321 under Khata No. 58 Mouza No. 83 at village Bhagabanda , in the district of Bokaro , was notified by the Government of Bihar under section 29 of the Indian Forest Act as Protected Forest , vide notification dated 24.05.1958 .
after the lands being so declared as Protected Forest land , the Forest Settlement Officer had demarcated the different plots and a detailed map was accordingly prepared .
the petitioners , being the employees of M / s Electro Steel Integrated Limited , had not only trespassed into the Protected Forest land , but had also illegally constructed boundary wall in violation of the provisions of the Indian Forest Act punishable for the offence under Section 33 of the Act .
5 } Petitioners have assailed the criminal prosecution initiated against them in each of the cases , on the following grounds :
( I ) The notification dated 24.5.1958 relied upon by the complainant , is incomplete since it was issued only after making it subject to the rights of individual persons over the lands in question and since no inquiry was conducted to assess the rights of the individual raiyats , their rights were not extinguished .
( II ) Even otherwise , the lands in plot nos . 1429 and 1289 and 1830 of village Bhaganbanda under Khata No. 58 , are not covered under any notification declaring the same to be protected forest or reserved forest .
as such , in respect of the lands in these plots , the complainant is neither empowered nor justified to prosecute the petitioners .
( iii ) Even if the entire case of the prosecution is taken to be true , no offence under sections 33 and 63 of the Indian Forest Act , 1927 is made out since the only allegation is that the petitioners are carrying out some construction activities in a protected forest and there is no allegation that the petitioners were found destroying any flora or fauna .
furthermore , none of the prosecution reports / complaints discloses as to how the petitioners , who were admittedly not present at the place of occurrence , could be liable for prosecution for commission of the alleged offences .
6 } Elaborating the grounds , counsel for the petitioners would explain that the notification dated 24.5.1958 does not bring the lands in question within the category of protected forest .
referring to the section 29 ( 1 ) of the Indian Forest ﻿ Act , learned counsel explains that the provisions no doubt empower the State Government to declare by notification that the provisions of Chapter IV of Act will be applicable to any forest or waste land , but the issuance of such notification is subject to a pre-condition that over such lands , the Government must have proprietary rights .
such notification in respect of lands of private individuals cannot be issued unless , the nature and extent of rights of the Government and that of the private persons over any or over the forest or waste land , have been inquired into and / or recorded by a survey of settlement .
learned counsel adds that even under exceptional circumstances , as laid down under section 29 ( 3 ) of the Act , such notification issued in case of urgency , cannot abridge or adversely affect any existing right of the individual or communities over the lands notified .
but till date , the nature and extent of rights of the Government and of private persons over the notified lands , has not been inquired into , nor has any survey as contemplated under Section 29 ( 3 ) of the Act , been carried out .
tracing the history of the land in dispute in the present cases , learned counsel explains that these lands were in fact permitted to be converted into a raiayti land by allowing the same to be settled in favour of the raiyats by order dated 16.8.1932 passed by the Deputy Collector , Purulia in Settlement Case No. 104 / 31-32 , in exercise of his powers under section 67 of the Chhotanagpur Tenancy Act and the order having attained finality , continued to remain operative and is binding on the State Government .
learned counsel argues further that the petitioners are employees of M / s Electro Steels Limited .
the disputed lands were acquired by the company under various sale deeds executed by the respective raiyats .
when the respondent Forest Department attempted to interfere with the rights of the raiyats over the lands , one such vendor of the company namely , Hari Pada Mahato instituted a suit in the court of Sub-Judge-l , Bokaro vide Title Suit No. 25 of 1996 for a decree for declaring his permanent occupancy raiyat and confirmation of possession over the lands which form part of plot no . 1159 , 1229 , 1329 and 1321 .
the Divisional Forest Officer , Bokaro appeared in the suit as defendant and contested the suit on the ground that the suit lands were already declared as Protected Forest by the Government notification dated 24.5.1958 .
the suit was decreed on contest on 29.5.2007 in favour of the plaintiff declaring that the plaintiff had become occupancy raiyat over the suit land and since no inquiry under Section 29 ( 3 ) of the Indian Forest Act was conducted and therefore , the right of the raiyat over the suit land has not been extinguished .
the trial court had also declared that the defendant &apos;s claim that the suit land was a Protected Forest , is a mere myth and such claim was not duly proved .
learned counsel argues that even though , against the judgment and decree of the trial court as passed in the aforementioned title suit no . 25 of 1996 , the defendant Divisional Forest Officer had filed an appeal which is still pending , but the operation of the judgment and decree has not been stayed by the Appellate Court .
learned counsel adds that in yet another suit filed by another raiyat vide title suit no . 26 of 1989 involving the lands under other plots , the same notification relied upon by the forest department came up for consideration by the court and the claim of the plaintiff / raiyat over the lands was upheld by declaring that the notification did not extinguish the rights of the raiyats over the lands in question .
the judgment and decree passed by the court on 22.8.1991 in ﻿ the aforementioned title suit no . 26 of 1989 , was affirmed up to the Hon &apos;ble Supreme Court in Civil Appeal no . 5471 of 1991 .
the Apex Court while dismissing the appeal , has held in the following terms :
after examining the documents which were part of the documents , we are satisfied that the lands in question were never declared to be forest land or private forest . &quot;
referring to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Bihar vs. K.S.R. Swami reported in AIR 1966 Supreme Court 1847 , learned counsel submits that while deciding the case under section 30 of the Bihar Protected Forest Act , which is pari materia to section 29 of the Indian Forest Act , the Apex Court had held that the notification issued under the provison to section 30 of the Act is not intended to amount to a final constitution of private forest as a private protected forest and the notification under the provison is to be made only pending the said inquiries , procedures and appeals .
arguing further , learned counsel submits that on the basis of the same notification dated 24.5.1958 , the State Government had initiated proceedings under the Public Land Encroachment Act against the company as well as the petitioners seeking their ejectment from the land covered under the notification .
such proceeding was challenged by the company in a writ application vide W.P. ( C ) No. 3362 of 2009 .
the State Government offered stiff contest in the writ application taking the same stand that the 1958 notification is binding upon the company and that the land referred to in the judgment and decree passed in Title Suit No. 25 of 1996 and Title Suit No. 26 of 1996 , do not cover the entire area and the said judgment was of no help to the writ petitioners .
despite such objection of the State Government , this court allowed the writ application holding inter-alia that in view of the disputed title , summary proceeding under the Public Land Encroachment Act , cannot be allowed to be continued and had quashed the proceeding initiated against the company and the petitioners under the Act .
learned counsel adds that all the present criminal cases are based on the same offence reports which were matters in the Public Land Encroachment proceedings and this High Court having already held that the company cannot be said to be encroacher over the forest land .
the criminal prosecution against the petitioners cannot legally be initiated for any alleged offence under the Indian Forest Act .
7 } Elaborating the third ground , learned counsel submits that even if the entire case of the prosecution is taken to be true , no offence under sections 33 and 63 of the Indian Forest Act , 1927 is made out since the only allegation is that the petitioners were carrying out some construction activities in the protected forest and there is no allegation that the petitioners were found destroying flora or fauna .
the petitioners were admittedly not present at the place of occurrence while the alleged act of construction work was being carried out .
under such circumstances , no vicarious criminal liability upon the Director or officials of the company can be enforced .
learned counsel in this context refers to a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Maksood Sayeed vs. State of Gujarat &#91; ( 2008 ) 5 SCC 668 &#93; and submits that there is no provision under the Indian Forest Act for fixing vicarious liability upon the Director or officials of the company . ﻿
8 . per contra , the stand taken by the opposite party namely , the state Government and the Forest Officials is as follows : the notification dated 24.5.1958 was issued by the Government of Bihar under provison to Section 29 ( 3 ) of the Indian Forest Act .
after issuance of the notification , the Forest Settlement Officer had demarcated the different plots of the notified land and had also prepared a detailed map of the different plots of Mouza Bhagaband .
pursuant to the notification , lands under the said notification , having been declared as a &quot; Protected Forest &quot; .
a general prohibition is contained in the notification against private individuals and any violation of the provisions of the Indian Forest Act is punishable under section 33 of the Act which has now been made a non-bailable and cognizable offence .
the employees of the petitioners &apos; company were found carrying non-forest activity such as levelling and digging forest land and encroaching upon the forest land by way of construction work .
such non-forest activities were found to be carried on lands in plot no . 1120 , 1329 , 1428 and other plots of Mouza Bhagaband and such activities were being carried at the behest of the petitioners on behalf of the petitioners company .
learned counsel adds that the word &quot; forest &quot; as explained by the Supreme Court in the Civil Appeal No. 202 of 1995 and as defined under Section 2 of the Forest Conservation Act , includes any area recorded as &quot; forest &quot; in the Government records irrespective of the ownership .
the same definition of forest would apply in the context of the Indian Forest Act also .
the Government of India , Ministry of Environment and Forest vide its Circular dated 17.2.2005 ( Annexure-C to the counter-affidavit ) had declared that the legal status of any land declared as forest or jungle jhar in Revenue Records , cannot be changed without prior approval of the Central Government as per the provisions of the Forest Conversation Act , 1980 .
learned counsel argues further that the status of the lands in plot no . 1120 , 1259 , 1329 and 1321 was recorded in the Government Survey Khatiyan as Jungal Jhar .
it is further argued that since the owner of the land , mentioned in the notification , is the State of Bihar and now the State of Jharkhand and therefore , the status of such lands would continue to be protected forest until denotified and deprotected by the competent authority of the Government of India .
learned counsel argues that the total lands which were declared by the 1958 notification as protected forest comprised of 133.38 acres whereas , the area of lands involved in the two title suits namely , Title Suit Nos. 25 of 1996 and 26 of 1996 comprised only total of 17.68 acres .
as such , the judgment and decree passed in the aforesaid two title suits filed by the purported raiyats , would not operate in respect of remaining lands which constitute the land in the present criminal proceedings .
learned counsel argues further that the purported sale deeds on the basis of which the petitioners company has sought to rely is of no avail as because , on the close scrutiny of the sale deeds , it would transpire that the lands purported to have been sold by the raiyats , though bear the same plot number , but do not fall within the 1958 notification issued by the Government of Bihar .
9 } From the rival submissions , the following salient features emerge : ﻿
( I ) The lands under several plots including plot nos . 1159 , 1389 , 1428 , 1289 , 1120 and 1321 of Mouza No. 83 of village Bhagaband in the district of Bokaro , were notified as protected forest land under the provisions of section 29 ( 3 ) of the Indian Forest Act by the Government of Bihar vide its notification dated 24.5.1958
( II ) Prior to the said notification , the lands were permitted to be converted into raiyati land by allowing the same to be settled in favour of the raiyats , by order dated 16.8.1932 passed by the Deputy Collector , Purulia in the Settlement Case No. 104 / 31-32 under the provisions of section 67A of the Chhotanagpur Tenancy Act .
ever since the date of settlement , the settlees have continued to remain in occupation of the land .
( iii ) The petitioners company M / s Electro Steels Limited claims to have acquired the lands from the settlees by virtue of separate sale deeds executed in its favour on different dates .
( iv ) Pursuant to the Government notification of 1958 when the Forest Department intended to take over the lands , some of the settled raiyats objected by filing title suits before the Civil Court .
two such suits vide Title Suit No. 26 of 1989 and Title Suit No. 25 of 1996 were filed .
the Forest Department contested both the suits on the common ground that the suit lands were notified and declared as Protected Forest by virtue of the notification issued by the State of Bihar in 1958 and therefore , the plaintiffs in the suits have no right , title and interest over the lands .
both the suits were decreed in favour of the plaintiffs and against the defendant Forest Department .
the findings recorded by the court of Sub Judge in Title Suit No. 26 of 1989 , was that the 1958 notification of the State Government even if issued under section 29 ( 3 ) of the Indian Forest Act , would not extinguish the rights of the raiyats , until the entire procedures as contemplated under the Act for the purposes of acquisition and converting the land into forest land , is not completed .
such findings was upheld even by the Supreme Court in the Special Leave Petition filed before it .
against the judgment and decree passed in favour of the plaintiffs in title Suit No. 25 of 1996 , the defendant Forest Department had preferred an appeal which is presently pending .
( V ) While considering an identical issue contested by the Forest Department on the basis of the notification issued under section 30 of the Bihar Protected Forest Act which is parameteria of section 29 of the Indian Forest Act , the Supreme Court has held that the notification even if issued under the provison to the Section , is not intended to amount to a final constitution of private protected forest and the notification is to be made only pending the required inquires , procedures and appeals .
10 } It is relevant to note here that admittedly , on the basis of same facts and cause of action , the Forest Department had initiated a proceeding under the Bihar Public Land Encroachment Act against the petitioners .
the proceeding on being contested , this court vide its judgment passed in WPC No. 3362 of 2009 , while ﻿ holding that in view of disputed title , the proceeding under the Bihar Public Land Encroachment Act is bad , had quashed the proceedings initiated against the employees of the company .
11 } The same issue , as involved in the present cases raised by the Forest Department on the basis of the State Government Notification of 1958 , was considered by a Bench of this court in the case of Brajesh Kumar Ray vs. State of Jharkhand &amp; another &#91; 2005 ( 3 ) JCR 464 ( Jhr . ) .
the petitioner Brajesh Kumar Ray challenged the order of cognizance of the offences under section 33 of the Indian Forest Act , 1927 which was passed by the Chief Judicial Magistrate , Bokaro on the basis of the prosecution report filed by the Divisional Forest Officer , Bokaro .
the stand taken by the Forest Department was that the lands over which the petitioner Brajesh Kumar Ray and others had encroached upon , were forest lands and waste lands which were declared as such under the State Government Notification of 1958 .
the writ petitioner protested the claim of the Forest Department on the ground that the lands were purchased from the original occupancy raiyats under registered sale deeds and that , notwithstanding the 1958 notification of the State Government , issued under section 29 ( 3 ) of the Indian Forest Act , raiyati rights of the raiyat , was not extinguished .
the writ petitioner had also taken support of the judgment and decree passed in favour of the raiyats in Title Suit No. 7 of 1997 since by the decree , the court had declared that the occupancy rights of the raiyats over the suit lands , was not extinguished merely by the 1958 notification issued by the State Government under section 29 ( 3 ) of the Indian Forest Act .
upon considering the entire issues involved in the writ application , this court had observed as follows :
all this merely shows that the parties are at litigating terms and both of them are claiming their respective right , title and possession .
the petitioners are claiming right and title on the basis of registered sale deeds obtained from the raiyats , whereas the State has claimed that it is &quot; protected forest &quot; and thereby land of the State .
in the aforesaid circumstances , there being genuine dispute of right and title , I hold that the criminal proceedings are not warranted in law .
in fact , the State Government including its Forest Department should pursue a remedy in the suit / appeal either pending before the Civil Court , having competent jurisdiction , or before this court . &quot;
on the basis of the aforesaid observations , the court had set aside the entire criminal proceedings against the writ petitioners .
12 } In the present cases also , the nature and dispute between the parties is identical in as much as , both parties have claimed their respective right , title and possession over the land under reference in these cases .
while the petitioners are claiming right and title on the basis of registered sale deeds obtained from the raiyats , the State as well as the Forest Department are claiming that the lands involved in these cases , are part of protected forest and thereby the lands of the State . ﻿
the facts as also the nature of dispute involved in the present applications being identical to the facts and dispute raised in the case of Brajesh Kumar Ray ( supra ) , the ratio decided by this court in the case of Brajesh Kumar Ray ( supra ) would squarely apply .
in the aforesaid situation , there being genuine dispute over right and title , hold that the criminal proceedings against the petitioners are not warranted in law .
the State including its Forest Department can pursue the remedy in the suit / appeal pending before the Civil Court having competent jurisdiction or before this court .
13 } In the light of the facts and circumstances and for the reasons stated above , the common order of cognizance dated 5.11.2009 passed in B.F. Case Nos. 21 of 2009 , 20 of 2009 , 19 of 2009 and 22 of 2009 and the entire criminal proceedings vide the separate cases pending against the petitioners following the order of cognizance before the court below , so far it relate to the petitioners of the present cases , are hereby quashed .
these criminal miscellaneous petitions are accordingly allowed with the above observations .
Hon &apos;ble R. K. MERATHIA , J Rohit Kumar &amp; Anr . Versus Shri Rajesh Kumar Gupta &amp; Ors . W.P. ( C ) No. 3791 of 2009 . decided on 13th August , 2010 .
Bihar Buildings ( Lease , Rent and Eviction ) Control Act , 1982Section 15 — Eviction suit-Direction to tenants-petitioners to deposit arrears and current rent @ Rs . 50,000 / - per month from date of institution of suit-Suit was filed on ground of default , personal necessity and breach of terms of tenancy – Tenants are liable to pay agreed rent , and not rent fixed by HRC-Conduct of petitioners in not paying agreed rent after taking property on lease , under a written lease agreement and moving HRC for purported fixation of fair rent is very unfair-Impugned order modified .
( paras 8 and 9 ) Case laws.-1999 ( 3 ) PLJR 120 ; 1998 ( 2 ) PLJR 619 — Referred to .
counsel . — M / s Delip Jerath , Manoj Tandon , For the Petitioners ; M / s L. K. Lal , K. K. Ambastha , For the Respondents .
order This writ petition has been filed against the order dated 27.7.2009 passed by the learned Sub-Judge VII , Ranchi in Title ( Eviction ) Suit No.5 of 2007 allowing the petition filed on behalf of the landlord-respondents under section 15 of the Bihar Buildings ( Lease , Rent and eviction ) Control Act , 1982 ( &apos; B.B.C. Act &apos; in short ) and directing the tenants-petitioners to deposit the arrears and current rent @ Rs . 50,000 / - per month from the date of institution of the suit i.e. 19.12.2007 . ﻿
2 . Mr. Delip Jerath , learned counsel appearing for the tenants submitted as follows :
the tenants filed an application on 7.5.2007 before the Sub-Divisional Officer cum House Rent Controller , Ranchi ( &apos; HRC &apos; for short ) for fixation of fair rent for the premises in question which was registered as B.B.C.Case No. 15 of 2007 in which by order dated 3.9.2007 , the rent was fixed at Rs . 30,000 / - per month and on 23.11.2007 the tenants were directed to deposit the said rent in court in B.B. C. Case No. 40 of 2007 which was depoited .
the present suit was filed on 19.12.2007 by the landlords in which the said application under Section 15 of the B.B.C. Act was filed to which the tenants filed rejoinder .
relying on the judgment reported in 1999 ( 3 ) PLJR 120 Arun Kumar Agrawal and Ors. vs. Gaurav Krishna Sahaya and Ors . , and 1998 ( 2 ) PLJR 619 Syed Abid Imam vs. Sharafat Hussain , he submitted that the fair rent fixed by HRC before filing of the suit i.e. Rs . 30,000 / - per month , has to be treated as the &apos; rent last paid in terms of Section 15 of the Act .
3 } On the other hand , Mr. Lal appearing for the landlords supported the impugned order .
he submitted that an appeal against the said order of HRC being Appeal No. 35 R 15 of 2007-08 is pending before the appellate authority , and therefore , it cannot be said that the fixation of fair rent by HRC has attained finality and therefore , the said judgments are not applicable in this case .
he further submitted that admittedly a lease agreement was entered into between the parties w.e.f. 1.6.2005 , with agreed rent @ Rs . 50,000 / - per month with stipulation of 15 % enhancement after each three years .
an amount of Rs. three lacs was paid by the tenants as security / advance which stood adjusted upto November 2005 , as no rent was paid by the tenants after taking the property on lease .
ultimately , the suit was filed on the ground of default , personal necessity and breach of terms of tenancy .
he referred to the following portion of the paragraph 9 and paragraph 13 of the rejoinder filed by the tenants to the petitioner filed on behalf of the landlords under Section 15 of the B.B.C. Act :
during the pendency of the BBC Case and its final order by the SDO , Ranchi , the defendants went on remitting through M. O. the monthly rent of the suit premises to the plaintiffs regularly from March 2007 to December 2007 which the plaintiffs regularly refused to accept . &quot;
in collecting the rent of the suit premises @ of Rs . 50,000 / - only , per month , the plaintiffs have received Rs . @ 20,000 / - per month in excess as the fair rent of the suit premises by the Rent Controller has been fixed the rent @ Rs . 30,000 / - per month .
before order of deposit of the rent this learned Court be pleased to adjust the excess deposit amount deposited by the defendants fixed by the Rent Controller . &quot;
Mr. Lal submitted that thus , the tenants admitted that the &apos; rent last paid &apos; was @ Rs . 50,000 / - per month .
4 } Admittedly the tenants took the suit premises on lease under a written lease agreement , w.e.f. 1.6.2005 , @ Rs . 50,000 / - per month as rent with 15 % enhancement on expiry of each three years , but they did not pay the agreed rent and moved HRC for fixation of fair rent which was fixed @ 30,000 / - per month , before institution of suit . ﻿
5 . the Judgments relied on behalf of the tenants instead of supporting their case , goes against them .
in both the cases , the fair rent fixed was much higher than the agreed rent and , such fixation became final , before institution of suits , whereas , the rent fixed in this case is less than the agreed rent and it did not attain finality before institution of the suit .
6 } Even in the case of Arun Kumar Agrawal ( supra ) , it is observed that &apos; last rent paid &apos; as appearing in Section 15 of the B.B.C. Act , is the &apos; last legally payable rent &apos; , by the tenant to the landlord . &quot;
7 } After considering several judgments , it was said in the case of Syed Abid Imam ( supra ) as follows :
10 } So far determination of fair rent under the old Act of 1947 , there is complete departure in the Act of 1982 .
the mode of fixation of fair rent has been changed and the municipal valuation of the tenanted premises which was the criteria in the Old Act was given a go-by and and now it has to be determined on the basis of prevalent rent in the locality .
in other words , under the Old Act , fair rent was always determined much below the normal agreed rent or normal rent prevailing in the locality as determination of fair rent was based on the municipal valuation of the property .
the said provision was , therefore , always used by the tenant as a weapon against the landlord , inasmuch as whenever landlord tried to evict the tenant , the latter immediately used to move the Controller for determination of fair rent .
the legislation in order to avoid any undue hardship on the landlord , used the word &apos; last paid rent &apos; in Section 11A ( old ) and stopped the tenant from putting a defence that it should be the fair rent and not the last paid that should be deposited .
it appears that the Legislature was conscious of the fact that there was a need to increase the fair rent by amending law to the effect that the fair rent shall be determined on the basis of rate of rent prevailing in the locality for the same or similar accommodation .
accordingly , in the Act of 1982 the said criteria was added in Section 6 of the Act .
14 } At this stage must refer the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Union of India vs. Dhanwanti Devi ( 1996 ( 6 ) SCC44 ) whereh their Lordship observed :
therefore , in order to understand and appreciate the binding force of a decision it is always necessary to see what were the facts in the case in which the decision was given and what was the point which had to be decided .
no judgment can be read as if it is a stature .
a word or a clause or a sentence in the judgment cannot be regarded as a full exposition of law .
law cannot afford to be static and , therefore , Judges are to employ an intelligent technique in the use of precedents . &quot;
8 } In the facts and circumstances of this case , it is held that the tenants are liable to pay the agreed rent , and not the rent fixed by H.R.C. , which is under challenge in appeal .
I am constrained to observe that the conduct of the petitioners in not paying the agreed rent after taking the property on lease , under a written lease agreement , and moving H.R.C. for purported fixation of fair rent , is very unfair . ﻿
9 . however , the impugned order is modified to the extent that the petitioners are directed to deposit arrears of rent @ Rs . 50,000 / - per month from the date of institution of suit i.e. , 19.12.2007 till August 2010 , by 15.9.2010 ; and the rent on and from September 2010 onwards , by the 15th day of each succeeding months , failing which their defence will be struck off .
10 } In the result , this writ petition is dismissed with modification in the impugned order , as aforesaid .
however , no costs .
Hon &apos;ble D. K. SINHA , J. Shashikant C. Adesara Versus State of Jharkhand &amp; Ors . Cr . Rev. No. 427 of 2008 . decided on 4th August , 2010 .
Indian Penal Code , 1860-Sections 406 , 420 , 467 , 468 , 471 and 120-B / 34 – Criminal Procedure Code , 1973 – Section 482 — Cheating and foregry-Discharge by Trial Court on the ground that case was purely of civil nature-Criminal law is not to be used as an instrument of wreaking private vengeance-Revisional powers of High Court are to be exercised only to correct injustice and not merely to rectify illegalities and finding of Lower Court may not be reversed merely because another view was possible-Controversy was in the nature of civil disputeMagistrate was justified in discharging them from their criminal liability by a reasoned order-Petitioner failed to associate himself with dispute so as to confer a legal right upon him to prefer criminal revision or by showing public interest at large-Revision application dismissed .
( paras 11 to 13 ) Counsel . — M / s Barun Kumar Sinha , Samir Kumar Lal , For the Petitioner ; A.P.P. , For the State ; M / s A. K. Kashyap , K. P Choudhary , A. R. Choudhary , For the O.P. Nos. 2 to 6 .
D. K. Sinha , J. — This Cr . revision is directed against the order impugned dated 25.2.2008 passed by Shri D. C. Awasthi , Judicial Magistrate , 1st Class , Jamshedpur in C / 1-477 / 2005 by which the Opposite Party Nos. 2 to 6 were discharged for the alleged offence under Sections 406 / 420 / 465 / 467 / 468 / 471 / 120B / 34 of the Indian Penal Code by observing that the case , which was presented by the complainant Ramesh Kumar Ranpara was purely a case of civil nature and the complainant could not provide sufficient material to frame charge in the aforesaid sections against them , as such , the Opposite Party Nos. 2 to 6 were discharged .
2 } The petitioner of this Cr . revision was neither the complainant nor the accused opposite party in complaint C / 1-477 / 2005 as such his locus to file the instant criminal revision has been challenged .
admittedly , the complainant did not prefer any revision nor the complainant has been impleaded as the opposite party by the petitioner herein who failed to associate himself so as to confer any legal right upon him to prefer this criminal revision by showing interest of the public at large . ﻿
3 . the prosecution story in short , as presented by the complainant Ramesh Kumar Ranpara , claiming himself to be the Secretary of Shri Jamshedpur Gujrati Samaj , a Society duly registered under Societies Registration Act , 1860 ( hereinafter referred to as an Act ) which was established in the year 1922 and thereafter a small school was opened in the year 1940 .
the school was registered in the year 1972 under the Act vide registration No. 82 / Bihar / Patna .
the complainant explained that the said school which was established by Shri Jamshedpur Gujrati Samaj was run by the Managing Committee of the said Samaj since the year 1940 , as such , the affairs of the said school was owned and managed by Shri Jamshedpur Gujrati Samaj with its Constitution Rules and Regulation under the name and style &quot; Narbharan Hansraj Gujarati M.E. School &quot; .
Jamshedpur drawn under the instruction of the members of the Executive Committee in the year 1940 .
the Executive Committee consisting of 12 members were authorized by the Samaj to look after the affairs of the institutions , however , the complainant alleged that no general meeting of the Executive Committee of Shri Jamshedpur Gujarati Samaj could be convened for the last 10 years till the institution of the complaint case .
it was alleged in the complaint that the Opposite Party No. 2 to 6 who claimed themselves to be the office bearers of the Samaj and the members of the Managing Committee of the schools , had no right to usurp or misappropriate the properties , income generated from N. H. Gujarati M. E. School and the another School namely D. N. Kamani High School , the latter being named by reason of the fact that the Kamani family i.e. the members of the Opposite Party were the doners who contributed in constructions of the school buildings and for such reason they were treating both the schools to be their personal properties though the same was registered under the Societies Registration Act at the instance of Shri Jamshedpur Gujarati Samaj .
the complainant alleged that the Managing Committee of the schools was formed unauthorizedly by the members of the O.P. Nos. 2 to 6 on 18.9.2003 to suit their unholy , illegal , unlawful and mala fide objects and they manufactured certain documents purporting to be the deed of trust concerning schools and that the accused persons ( Opposite Party Nos. 2 to 6 herein ) were not furnishing the statement of income generated from resources and the expenditure of the schools and thereby misappropriated huge amount for their personal gains .
it was more particularly alleged against the O.P. No.6 Praful H. Gandhi that he in connivance and concert with the members of the Opposite Party No.2 to 5 assumed the office of secretary of the so-called Managing Committee and thereby embezzled the funds including the subscriptions realized from the members of Gujarati Samaj .
4 } The learned Judicial Magistrate meticulously dealt with all the Sections of the offence proposed by the complainant against the members of the Opposite Party Nos. 2 to 6 much less the offence alleged under Section 406 of the Indian Penal Code after examination of all the complainant &apos;s witnesses during enquiry under Section 202 Code of Criminal Procedure and came to finding that the alleged offences could not be prima facie attracted against the O.P. No.2 to 6 herein .
5 } Mr. Barun Kumar Sinha learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that after formation of separate Jharkhand State , Shri Jamshedpur Gujrati Samaj applied for fresh registration and accordingly the said Samaj was registered vide ﻿ registration No. 129 dated 12.7.2004 under the Societies Registration Act , 1860 .
pursuant to that , the Samaj informed the Inspector General of Registration Bihar Patna to transfer their file to the jurisdiction of Jharkhand State , Ranchi .
the members of the Opposite Party No.2 to 6 claimed to be the members of original Gujrati Samaj on the basis of such registration in the year 1972 as also in the year 2004 and they also elected the members of the Executive Committee for the year 2003-04 .
assailing the conduct of the members of the Opposite Party Nos. 2 to 6 , learned Counsel explained that as per Rules and Regulation of Shri Jamshedpur Gujrati Samaj , a general meeting of the Samaj aught to have been convened for electing 5 members as trustee by majority of votes but the Opposite Party Nos. 2 to 5 who were the members of the same family , claimed themselves as the members of trustee as if they were elected by the majority votes in the general meeting , yet , they started raising subscription amount from the members of the Samaj for their own benefits on the pretext of renewal of membership of the individual .
6 } Learned Counsel attracted attention by submitting that the allegations were specific against the members of the Opposite Party Nos. 2 to 6 in the statement of the witnesses examined during enquiry and the learned Judicial Magistrate having been , prima facie , satisfied with the materials , took the cognizance of the offence under Sections 406 / 420 / 465 / 467 / 468 / 471 r / w 120B of the Indian Penal Code against the accused of the complaint , who were the O.P. Nos. 2 to 6 herein but later on to utter surprise of the petitioner , on the same set of materials on record the learned Judicial Magistrate by the impugned order dated 25.2.2008 discharged the members of the Opposite Party by observing that the case in hand was a case of civil nature .
7 } Mr. A. K. Kashyap , learned Sr. Counsel , appearing on behalf of the members of the Opposite Party Nos. 2 to 6 strongly confronted the submissions as made above and raised the issue of locus of the petitioner herein to file the present Criminal Revision as he was neither the informant nor the witness in the entire criminal proceeding in Complaint Case No . C / 1-477 / 2005 and no prejudice or injustice has been caused to the petitioner as he cannot be said to be an aggrieved by the impugned order for the reason that the petitioner was never a member of Shri Jamshedpur Gujrati Samaj which was earlier registered under the Act vide Registration No. 82 / 1971-72 in the ersthwil State of Bihar and later on it was registered under the Act vide Registration No. 129 / 2004-05 after creation of separate State of Jharkhand pursuant to the notice published by the State Government calling upon for renewal for the earlier registration of societies .
8 } Mr. Kashyap , learned Sr. Counsel further pointed out that a parallel Samaj in the same name had first made application in 2004 by the rival group which was registered under the Act vide Registration No. 129 / 2004-05 after State of Jharkhand was created , having without reference or bearing of any other registration much less of the year 1972 in the erstwhile State of Bihar , as such , the Registration No. 129 / 2004-2005 was totally different which was obtained by the rival group and had no relation at all with the Samaj which was already registered in the year 1972 in the erstwhile State of Bihar . ﻿
9 . Mr. Kashyap asserted that the instant Criminal Revision was brought about by the petitioner with mala fide intention to harass the members of the Opposite Party with oblique motive , to settle personal vendetta and to take vengeance out of way .
in that manner , the petitioner was abusing the process of law to frustrate the impugned order which was recorded on the basis of the materials .
the learned Counsel reiterated that the petitioner did not have locus to invoke the revisional jurisdiction before the High Court when there was no error , illegality or impropriety in the impugned order while discharging the members of the Opposite Party Nos. 2 to 6 from their criminal liability .
10 } Finally , Mr. Kashyap submitted that a Title Suit was already pending vide Title Suit No. 99 of 2005 wherein the creation of trust and many other relevant issues have been challenged and was yet to be adjudicated .
as regards ambit , scope and application of the offence alleged under Sections 465 / 467 / 468 / 471 r / w 120B and 34 of the Indian Penal Code were concerned , no prima facie material could be brought on the record during enquiry under Section 202 of the Code of Criminal Procedure before framing of charge so as to call for criminal liability of the Opposite Party Nos. 2 to 6 , as such , this Criminal Revision may be dismissed being devoid of merit .
11 } The petitioner has preferred this Criminal Revision under Sections 397 and 401 of the Code of Criminal Procedure with the prayer for setting aside the order impugned as discussed here-in-before which was recorded by Shri D.C. Awasthi , Judicial Magistrate , 1st Class on 25.2.2008 by which the accused of the Complaint Petition that was brought about by the complainant Ramesh Kumar Ranpara were discharged as the dispute / controversy raised by the complainant as against them i.e. the O.P. Nos. 2 to 6 herein was found to be a dispute purely of civil nature .
the locus of the petitioner Shashikant C. Adesara has been consistently challenged by the Opposite Party Nos. 2 to 6 explaining that the petitioner was neither the complainant nor the accused-Opposite Party in complaint Case No . C / 1-477 / 2005 , as such , he was not a competent party to file the instant criminal revision .
admittedly , the complainant did not prefer any revision nor he has been impleaded as the Opposite Party in the instant revision .
the law is well settled that the criminal law is not to be used as an instrument of wreaking private vengeance .
as a broad proposition , revisional interference may be justified where ( a ) the decision is grossly erroneous , ( b ) there is no compliance with the provisions of law ( c ) the finding of fact affecting the decision is not based on evidence ( d ) material evidence of the parties is not considered and ( e ) judicial discretion is given arbitrarily or perversely .
it is further settled law that the revisional powers of the High Court are to be exercised only to correct injustice and not merely to rectify illegalities and that the finding of the lower court may not be reversed merely because another view was possible .
12 } Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case , argument advanced on behalf of the parties , I find substance in the contention of the learned Senior Counsel for the Opposite Party Nos. 2 to 6 that though the cognizance of the offence was taken but the learned Judicial Magistrate having been satisfied with the materials collected during enquiry under Section 202 Code of Criminal Procedure observed that it did not entail , prima facie , complicity of the ﻿ Opposite Party Nos. 2 to 6 for the alleged offences and further observed that the materials on record suggested that the controversy was in the nature of civil dispute .
the learned Judicial Magistrate was justified in discharging them from their criminal liability by a reasoned order to which I subscribe and uphold .
learned Counsel for the petitioner failed to show any illegality or irregularity in the order impugned or the impropriety of the Judicial Magistrate to draw such order .
in the given facts and situation a stranger , unconcerned with the controversy cannot be permitted to wreck vengeance when the complainant did not find himself aggrieved by the order impugned by which the Opposite Party Nos. 2 to were discharged from their criminal liability .
the petitioner failed to associate himself with the dispute so as to confer a legal right upon him to prefer this criminal revision or by showing public interest at large and for that he would have invoked extraordinary writ jurisdiction of this Court , if at all .
I do not find that the Judicial Magistrate has exercised his discretion arbitrarily or perversely while recording the order of discharge .
the Counsel for the Opposite Party has admitted Title Suit there being already filed before the appropriate court for adjudication of certain controversies , which is likely to be adjudicated .
the order impugned does not call for interference .
13 } I , therefore , in the facts and circumstances of the case , find that this Criminal Revision is devoid of merit as such it is dismissed .
Hon &apos;ble D. G. R. PATNAIK , J Md . Safique &amp; Ors . Versus State of Jharkhand &amp; Ors . writ Petition ( Civil ) No. 4470 of 2004 . decided on 31st July , 2010 .
in the matter of an application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India .
Chhotanagpur Tenancy Act , 1908-Section 71-A-RestorationApplication for restoration of land allowed by special officer in favour of respondent-Order of eviction could not be executed since petitioners were found in possession of lands-Under tenancy laws a valid agricultural lease may be created by registered lease instrument , and if such a registered document is created delivery of possession is not necessary to prove title of lessee-If however , lease is not registered and is inadmissible as evidence of title , it will always be open to tenant concerned to show that he has obtained raiyati interest on the strength of actual possession and acceptance of rent by landlord-Petitioners have advanced their claim on alternative pleas based both on documents claimed and also on the basis of actual possession-It was obligatory on part of Special Officer to record a definite finding on petitioners &apos; claim of actual possession over land ever since purported date of Chapparbandi settlement in 1949 – Impugned order set aside-Matter remitted to Special Officer for reconsideration .
order
D. G. R. Patnaik , J.-Despite service of notices upon Respondent Nos. 6 to 11 , they have neither appeared in person nor through lawyer .
counsel for the Respondent Nos. 1 to 5 is present .
this case is therefore taken up for hearing on the basis of the submissions made by the counsel for the petitioners and counsel for the Respondent Nos. 1 to 5 .
2 } The petitioners in this writ application have challenged the order dated 28.8.1999 passed by the Special Officer , Scheduled Area Regulation , Ranchi ( Respondent No.4 ) in S.A.R. Case No. 129 of 1986-87 of the C.N.T. Act , 1908 , whereby and whereunder the restoration of the lands under dispute has been allowed in favour of the private respondent Nos. 6 to 11 under Section 71-A ( C.N.T. Act , 1908 ) .
challenge also is to the order dated 3.6.2002 ( Annexure-6 ) passed by the Deputy Commissioner , Ranchi ( Respondent No. 3 ) in Case No. 220 R 15 / 1999-2000 , whereby the appeal filed by the petitioners against the impugned order of the Special Officer was dismissed .
further , challenge is also to the order dated 26.8.2003 ( Annexure-7 ) passed by the Commissioner , South Chotanagpur Division , Ranchi ( Respondent No. 2 ) in S.A.R. Revision No. 97 of 2003 , whereby the revision filed against the impugned order of the Deputy Commissioner was dismissed .
3 } Facts relevant for the disposal of this case is as follows :
on the basis of a report submitted by the Circle Officer , Town Anchal , Ranchi ( Respondent No. 5 ) , a proceeding under Section 71-A of the C.N.T. Act , vide S.A.R. No. 129 of 1986-87 was initiated against the Respondent No.6 in respect of the lands appertaining to Plot No. 759 under Khata No. 34 situated at Hindpiri , Ranchi , admeasuring 33 decimals .
an order of eviction was passed in the case , but the same could not be executed , since on visiting the said lands , the petitioners were found in possession of the lands .
4 } On being informed about the eviction order passed by the Special Officer , the petitioners filed a writ petition in this Court in C.W.J.C. No. 955 of 1993 ( R ) .
by order dated 20.1.1994 , this Court had directed the Special officer ( Respondent No. 4 ) , to permit the petitioners and the proforma respondent herein , to be added as necessary parties in the proceeding .
pursuant to the order , the petitioners and the proforma respondent were made party in the proceeding which was started afresh .
the petitioners filed their show cause replies claiming their right , title and interest over the disputed lands .
5 } The case of the petitioners , as pleaded , is that the lands in question had originally belonged to the recorded raiyats namely , Somra Oraon and Murla Oraon .
the original raiyats had surrendered the lands to the ex-landlord namely , Baralal Kandarp Nath Shahdeo .
6 } On 3.12.1938 , the ex-landlord took possession of the lands .
much later , on 13.1.1949 , he granted chhapparbandi settlement of the lands in favour of one Sheikh Karamat S / o Sheikh Rahim .
after the settlement made in his favour , the ﻿ said settlee was also assessed to chhapparbandi rents by the ex-landlord .
upon vesting of the intermediary rights under the Bihar Land Reforms Act , 1950 , the exlandlord filed a return in compensation Case No. 6 / 55-56 declaring the name of settlee Sheikh Karamat as a raiyat with chhapparbandi rights over the lands in question .
thereafter , jamabandi was opened in the name of the settlee in respect of the lands and ever since the opening of the jamabandi , the settlee Sheikh Karamat was regularly paying rent to the State Government and after his death , his heirs continued to pay the rent regularly .
further case of the petitioners is that Sheikh Kalim and Sheikh Muslim , who were the surviving legal heirs and representatives of the original settlee , sold the lands to the petitioners and to the proforma respondents through different sale deeds , which were executed and registered in December , 1988 and February , 1989 .
ever since after the date of purchase , the petitioners entered into possession over the lands and have constructed houses over the same and have been residing therein along with their families publicly to the knowledge of all concerned .
in support of their claim of right over the disputed lands , the petitioners had filed the document of surrender , document of settlement , return filed by the exlandlord upon vesting of intermediaries interest in the State Government , and the sale deeds executed in favour of the petitioners and the proforma respondents .
it needs to be noted here that in the proceedings before the Special Officer , the Respondent Nos. 6 to 11 did not appear or offer contest at any stage of the proceedings .
7 } From perusal of the impugned order of the Special Officer , it appears that the claim of the petitioners was dismissed on the ground that the documents which the petitioners had produced in support of their case being unregistered documents and the petitioners having failed to produce the rent receipts issued if any by the ex-landlord in favour of the purported settlee or even issued by the Government in favour of the purported settlee , the said documents were not reliable .
it was also observed that as per the report of the Circle Officer , there was no construction in existence on the disputed lands under reference prior to 1969 and the existing structure appears to have been made only after the execution of the sale deed in 1988 in favour of the petitioners .
the Special Officer had refused to accept copies of the unregistered surrender deed of 1938 on the ground that the same has not been introduced in accordance with the procedure laid down under the Evidence Act .
the Special Officer drew inference that the transfer of the land was obtained by the petitioners in their favour in the year 1988 on the basis of forged documents and in violation of the provisions of Section 46 of the C.N.T. Act and , therefore , directed the eviction of the petitioners from the lands .
8 } The petitioners have assailed the impugned order of the Special Officer , on the ground that the same is totally perverse and without proper appreciation of the evidences on record and by misconvincing the provisions of law both under the Evidence Act as also under the C.N.T. Act . ﻿
9 . learned counsel for the petitioners submits that the Special Officer has erred in failing to consider that the original recorded raiyat namely , Somra Oraon and Murla Oraon had voluntarily surrendered the land in favour of the ex-landlord on 3.12.1938 .
according to the customs prevailing at that point of time , the document of surrender was not required to be registered .
the Special Officer had erred in failing to appreciate that the settlement made in favour of the settlee Sheikh Karamat by the ex-landlord by virtue of the Sada Hukumnama and in fact , had conferred a valid right , title and interest in favour of the settlee , who obtained raiyati interest over the land upon transfer of the raiyati possession to the land unto him by the ex-landlord .
the rent receipts issued by the landlord and similar rent receipts issued by the State Government after the vesting of the land in the State Government had recognized the vendor of the petitioners as the chapparbandi raiyati with respect to the lands in question and does confirm the fact that after the vesting of the intermediaries interest , the settlee Sheikh Karamat , had perfected his right over the lands .
to gain support of his contentions , learned counsel refers to and relies upon a Full Bench judgment of the Patna High Court in the case of Most . Ugni &amp; Anr. vs. Chowa Mahto &amp; Ors . &#91; air 1968 Patna 302 &#93; .
learned counsel adds further that the provisions of Section 68 of the Chotanagpur Tenancy Act has wrongly been applied for ejecting the petitioners .
according to the learned counsel , the facts and circumstances of the case would confirm that the original raiyati tenant had voluntarily surrendered the raiyati land in favour of the ex-landlord and after more than 10 years of surrender , the chapparbandi settlement of the land was made by the ex-landlord in favour of the father of the vendor of the petitioners .
10 } Assailing the impugned order of the Deputy Commissioner passed in the appeal preferred by the petitioners , learned counsel submits that the appeal was dismissed on the basis of error of record in as much as , the Deputy Commissioner had wrongly treated a gap of 40 days only in between the date of surrender and the date of chapparbandi settlement , whereas the gap was of more than 10 years .
learned counsel adds further that the concerned authorities have also erred in failing to consider that the land , which was settled as chapparbandi lands , could not be amenable to the provisions of Section 71A of the C.N.T. Act .
furthermore , the very initiation of proceeding for restoration of the lands , was not maintainable since it was initiated after a gap of 47 years after the date when the petitioners &apos; vendors came into possession of the land .
11 } Counsel for the State , on the other hand , while submitting arguments in support of the impugned orders , would want to controvert the grounds raised by the petitioners on the basis of the following objections :
( I ) The document of purported surrender of the disputed land claimed to have been made by the original tenant in favour of the ex-landlord is an unregistered document and , therefore , the same cannot be relied upon .
( II ) In absence of any reliable evidence to confirm that the vendors of the petitioners , had acquired raiyati interest and possession over the lands , the petitioners who have been found in occupation over the lands admittedly , since 1988 , are liable to be ejected from the lands under the provisions of Section 68 of the Chhotanagpur Tenancy Act . ﻿
12 . having heard counsel for the parties and having gone through the materials on record , including the impugned orders of the concerned authorities , the following salient features of the petitioners &apos; case do emerge :
( I ) The specific claim of the petitioners is that the original raiyati tenants had surrendered the disputed land in favour of the ex-landlord in 1938 .
( II ) The ex-landlord , by executing a Sada Hukumnama , made a chapparbandi settlement of the land in favour of the ancestor of the vendors of the petitioners .
( iii ) After the settlement so made , the ex-landlord granted rent receipts to the settlee and subsequently , upon vesting of the land in the State of Jharkhand , and upon extinguishing of the intermediaries , the ex-landlord had submitted returns declaring the ancestor of the vendors of the present petitioners as a settled raiyat in respect of the land in question .
( iv ) Subsequently , the State Government had also recognized the raiyati interest of the settlee and had issued rent receipts to him .
( V ) In the S.A.R. proceeding before the Special Officer , the petitioners had adduced evidences both oral and documentary , including the Sada Hukumnama and rent receipts purportedly issued in favour of the original settlee .
( VI ) The successors of the original raiyati tenant namely , the Respondent Nos. 7 to 11 , had though been noticed to participate in the S.A.R. proceedings , but had never appeared nor offered any contest to the claim of the petitioners nor disputed the validity of the documents adduced and relied upon by the petitioners in support of their claim of right over the land .
( VII ) The Special Officer had rejected the claim of the petitioners only on the ground that the documents relied upon by the petitioners were unregistered documents .
13 } Thus , the claim of the petitioners over the land is based on two alternative pleas .
the first being on the basis of the documents namely , the Sada Hukumnama and the purported deed of chapparbandi settlement and the rent receipts .
the alternative plea is that the ancestor of the vendors of the petitioners had come in actual possession of the lands on the date of settlement made by the ex-landlord way back in 1949 and had perfected his right , title and interest over the land , since after the date of settlement made in his favour .
thus , the claim of the petitioners is based on actual possession coupled with the rent acceptance by the ex-landlord .
14 } From perusal of the impugned order of the Special Officer , it appears that no finding has been recorded over the petitioners &apos; claim based on actual possession of the lands .
the Special Officer has rejected the claim only on the ground that the documents adduced by the petitioners being unregistered documents , the same are inadmissible in evidence , although the petitioners had pleaded that on the date when the originally recorded tenants , namely , Somra Oraon and Murla Oraon , had voluntarily surrendered the land unto the ex-landlord , i.e. on 3.12.1938 , ﻿ the prevailing customs did not necessitate such documents to be registered under Section 17 of the Registration Act .
15 } From the perusal of the impugned order of the Deputy Commissioner , it appears that the claim of surrender of the land by the originally recorded tenants made in favour of the ex-landlord and the claim of settlement of the land in favour of the originally settlee-Sheikh Karamat , has been rejected , on the ground that there was a gap of only 40 days in between the date of surrender and the date of chapparbandi settlement , raising thereby a suspicion regarding the genuineness of the transaction .
such finding appears to be an error of record , in view of the fact that the date of surrender was claimed to be of the year 1938 , and the settlement claimed to have been made in favour of Sheikh Karamat , is of the year 1949 .
on reading the impugned orders , it appears that both the officers have ignored the need to record a finding regarding the claim of the petitioners , made on the basis of actual possession of the lands , ever since the date of chapparbandi settlement claimed to have been made by ex-landlord in favour of Sheikh Karamat .
16 } It is a settled principle under the tenancy laws that a valid agricultural lease may be created by registered lease instrument , and if such a registered document is created , delivery of possession is not necessary to prove the title of the lessee .
if , however , the lease is not registered , and is therefore , inadmissible as evidence of title , it will always be open to the tenant concerned to show that he has obtained raiyati interest on the strength of actual possession and acceptance of rent by the landlord .
it is also a settled principle of law that provision of Section 91 of the Evidence Act only excludes other evidence of terms of a document , but not of existence of contract or relationship of landlord and tenant brought about by possession and payment of rent .
the Bihar Tenancy Act does not create a bar to the proprietor conferring right of the tenant for executing the document .
however , such document would no doubt require registration under Section 17 ( 1 ) ( b ) of the Registration Act , if it creates lease for a term exceeding one year or reserving a yearly rent and , If it is not registered , it cannot be used as evidence of title in view of Section 49 of the Registration Act .
however , even as per provison to Section 49 of the Act , the unregistered document can be used for collateral purposes .
for the purposes of ascertaining the unregistered document , though no evidence of title , can be looked into , for collateral purposes .
this view finds support from several judgments of the Patna High Court , including the judgment in the case of Deo Saran Sahu vs. Ram Das Sahu , 1967 BLJR 574 , and an earlier judgment in the case of Bhagwat Ram vs. Chhedilal , 1955 BLJR 24 .
on the basis of the aforesaid principle , the Patna High Court has , in several decisions , held that , if a person claims to have obtained raiyati interest on an unregistered document and further asserts that he came into actual possession on the same and has continued in such possession and that his payment of rent has been accepted by the landlord , his title to raiyati interest must be recognized , even though the unregistered lease is inadmissible as evidence of title . ﻿
17 . in the case of Most . Ugni &amp; Anr . ( supra ) , the Full Bench of the Patna High Court has , while considering the value of unregistered Hukumnama , has observed as follows :
the unregistered Hukumnama though admissible could be looked into to show the nature and character of possession .
the oral evidence of terms of lease is not admissible , but independent of the Hukumnama , rent receipts themselves would indicate the rate of rent , the area and the nature of the right of the lessee &quot; .
18 } In the same judgment , the Court had further observed as follows :
it is true that a valid agricultural lease may be created by a registered instrument and if such a registered document is created , the delivery of possession is not necessary to prove title of the lessee .
if , however , the lease is not registered , and is , therefore , inadmissible as evidence of title , it will be open to the tenant concerned to show that he obtained raiyati interest on the strength of actual possession and acceptance of rent by the landlord .
there is also no legal bar to a person claiming raiyati interest on two alternative pleas .
he may claim such a right on the basis of a written document of lease .
if , however , such claim fails on the ground that the document , being compulsorily registrable , was not registered , nevertheless his alternative claim based on actual possession , coupled with acceptance of rent by the landlord , may succeed &quot; .
19 } As pointed out above , the petitioners have advanced their claim on the alternative pleas based both on the documents claimed and also on the basis of actual possession .
it was , therefore , obligatory on the part of the Special Officer to record a definite finding on the petitioners &apos; claim of actual possession over the land ever since the purported date of chapparbandi settlement in 1949 .
20 } In the light of the facts and circumstances and the discussions made above , I find merit in this application .
accordingly , this application is allowed .
the impugned order of the Special Officer passed in S.A.R. Case No. 129 of 1986-87 and the impugned order of Revisional Authority whereby , the impugned order of the Special Officer has been sustained , are hereby set aside .
the matter is remitted back to the Special Officer to reconsider the issues raised by the petitioners and record his findings afresh .
till the matter is finally decided by the Special Officer , the possession of the petitioners over the disputed land , shall not be disturbed
Hon &apos;ble SUSHIL HARKAULI , ACJ. and D. N. PATEL , J.
Prevention of Money Laundering Act , 2002-Section 45 ( 1A ) Constitution of India , 1950 – Article 226 – PIL-Earning of unprecedented amount of illicit money by some of respondents by abuse of their official positions-Acquiring of money by misuse of official position , being an offence under various provisions of Indian Penal Code and under Prevention of Corruption Act is to be normally investigated by State Investigating Agencies — However , if acquisition of such proceeds of crime is also alleged to be covered u / s 3 of PML Act , investigation is to be done by Enforcement Directorate , to exclusion of other agenciesAmount is alleged to run into several hundred crores-There is an allegation of its investment in property , shares etc. not only in India but also abroad-Matter on face of it requires a systematic , scientific and analyzed investigation by expert hand like CBI-Where Ex . Ministers , including Ex . Chief Minister , are involved , it is necessary to hand over investigation to an independent agency like CBI-It will be open to Central Government to exercise powers u / s 45 ( 1A ) of Act for transferring investigation from enforcement directorate to CBI .
order On the previous date i.e. 29th July , 2010 we had required the petitioner to appear in person with proof of his identity for examining whether an alleged &quot; sting operation &quot; said to have been conducted by the representative of one of the respondents of this PIL , showing money bargaining being done between the counsel for the petitioner and the representative of the respondents with regard to this litigation , was correct or not .
2 } Today an adjournment has been sought on the ground that the learned counsel for the petitioner is hospitalized .
we , therefore , fixed the case for 16th of August , 2010 to enable the petitioner to comply with the order dated 29th July , 2010 on the said date .
3 } However , considering the long time , which has elapsed , we are of the opinion that before the evidence vanishes or is destroyed by further passage of time , it is necessary to examine the main issue involved in this case that is whether the investigation of the criminal cases should or should not be referred for investigation or further investigation or re-investigation , as may be necessary in the facts of each of the cases , to the Central Bureau of Investigation .
4 } The allegations as reported in the newspapers and also mentioned in the writ petition are of earning of unprecedented amount of illicit money by some of the respondents by abuse of their official positions , which amounts to offence ﻿ under various provisions of the Indian Penal Code as also under the Prevention of Corruption Act .
some other private respondents are alleged to have assisted in investment of the money , alleged to have been so acquired by illicit means .
5 } Some matters have been under investigation by the Enforcement Directorate under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act , 2002 ( hereinafter referred as the PML Act ) .
some matters are being investigated by the State Investigating Agency , namely , the Vigilance Department of the State of Jharkhand .
the Income Tax Department is also examining the matter for its own purposes .
6 } Acquiring of money by misuse of official position , being an offence under the various provisions of the Indian Penal Code and under the Prevention of Corruption Act , is to be normally investigated by the State Investigating Agencies .
however , if the acquisition of such proceeds of crime is also alleged to be covered under Section 3 of the PML Act , the investigation is to be done by the Enforcement Directorate , to the exclusion of other agencies in view of Section 45 ( 1A ) of the PML Act .
even such investigation by the Enforcement Directorate can be transferred by a general or special order of the Central Government to other agencies .
for ready reference , Section 45 ( 1A ) is reproduced below :
45 } Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable .
( 1A ) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973 ( 2 of 1974 ) , or any other provision of this Act , no police officer shall investigate into an offence under this Act unless specifically authorized , by the Central Government by a general or special order , and , subject to such conditions as may be prescribed . &quot;
7 } Whether the offence is one of the money laundering depends upon whether proceeds of crime of the offences mentioned in the schedule of the PML Act ) are projected as untained property .
Santosh Singh vs Union Of India And Anr on 22 July , 2016
the petitioner is an advocate-on-record practicing before this Court .
invoking the jurisdiction under Article 32 of the Constitution , the petitioner states that she is “ deeply distressed with the rapidly degrading moral values in the society touching every aspect of life where making money , anyhow has become the sole motto of society ” .
2 The grievance of the petitioner is that the present education system does not inculcate the true purpose of education , which is to produce a good human being .
the State , in the submission of the petitioner , is under a constitutional obligation to endeavour to provide educational facilities which inculcate moral values in the course of primary and secondary education .
it has been urged that the course curriculum prescribed by the Central Board of Secondary Education ( “ CBSE ” ) and the National Policy on Education do not recognise a sufficient status for “ moral education ” .
in the submission of the petitioner , the failure to include moral science as a compulsory subject violates Article 25 of the Constitution which recognises the freedom of conscience and the fundamental right to profess , practice and propagate religion .
this in the submission militates against the fundamental duties contained in Article 51A ( f ) of the Constitution .
impressed by the need to protect the moral fibre of the nation , the petitioner seeks a mandamus for the inclusion of moral science as a compulsory subject in the syllabus of school education from classes I to XII “ in order to inculcate moral values and nurture national character in the national interest ” .
3 The respondents to these proceedings are the Union of India through the Ministry of Human Resource Development and CBSE .
in response to the notice issued by this Court on 2 February 2015 , a counter affidavit has been filed by CBSE before this Court .
the learned ASG states that the Union of India adopts the counter filed by CBSE .
4 The National Policy on Education of 1986 , while examining the values of education states thus :
8.4 The growing concern over the erosion of essential values and an increasing cynicism in society has brought to focus the need for readjustments in the curriculum in order to make education a forceful tool for the cultivation of social and moral values .
8.5 In our culturally plural society , education should foster universal and eternal values , oriented towards the unity and integration of our people .
such value education should help eliminate obscurantism , religious fanaticism , violence , superstition and fatalism .
8.6 Apart from this combative role , value education has a profound positive content , based on our heritage , national and universal goals and perceptions .
it should lay primary emphasis on this aspect .
similarly , the National Curriculum Framework of 2005 emphasised that :
we need to reaffirm our commitment to the concept of equality , within the landscape of cultural and socio-economic diversity from which children enter into the portals of the school .
individual aspirations in a competitive economy tend to reduce educating to being an instrument of material success .
the perception , which places the individual in exclusively competitive relationships , puts unreasonable stress on children , and thus distorts values .
it also makes learning from each other a matter of little consequence .
education must be able to promote values that foster peace , humaneness and tolerance in a multicultural society .
5 The Framework emphasizes that in order to foster democracy as a way of life rather than only as a system of governance , the values enshrined in the Constitution assume paramount significance .
the Framework takes specific note of the importance ascribed by the Constitution to the constitutional values of equality , justice , liberty and secularism .
6 CBSE has stated in its response that it has integrated these values of education across the curriculum to inculcate constitutional values and core universal human values which are affirmed across all cultures .
CBSE states that it emphasises value based education by adopting a three pronged approach which comprehends :
( I ) drawing all stakeholders into the school community ;
( II ) permeating the school climate across its entire curriculum ;
( iii ) including in its materials a broad range of concepts such as a positive , just and caring school environment , moral education , social- emotional learning , positive youth development , civic education and service learning .
7 In order to facilitate the achievement of these objects , CBSE has adopted concrete measures including a modified scheme of assessment with attitude and values .
in 2009 , CBSE strengthened the scheme of assessment for classes IX and X by emphasising co-scholastic areas of life-skills , attitudes and values , sports and games as well as co-curricular activities .
the Board has specifically focused on Article 51A of the Constitution in its effort to inculcate democratic values .
besides introducing a modified scheme of assessment with attitude and values , CBSE has introduced value based questions in the Summative Assessment – II in classes IX and X and in the year end examination for classes XI and XII from the year 2012-2013 .
the Board has adopted an interdisciplinary approach and decided to assess students with approximately a five per cent weightage in each subject at the above Summative Assessments through questions which have been integrated with the content of the subject and analysed on the basis of the values it reflects .
8 In order to further this object , circulars were issued by CBSE on 19 June 2012 .
CBSE has also published a Handbook for teachers on value education in 1997 of which revised editions were brought out in 2003 and 2012 .
in 2015 , CBSE launched a values education kit comprising of a revised values education teachers ’ Handbook , a set of value cards and other materials .
the values education kit has been developed to provide broad guidelines for teachers on moral education .
this serves as a resource for teachers to conduct interactive sessions in their classes .
9 Among the other steps which have been taken by CBSE are :
“ ( i ) A Manual on environmental education and adolescence education ;
( II ) Initiation of an ‘ Awakened Citizens Programme ’ with Ramakrishan Mission ;
( iii ) An educators Manual for gender sensitivity pedagogy at primary , middle , secondary and senior secondary classes ;
( iv ) Introduction of a human rights and gender studies elective course ;
( V ) Steps to improve inclusive education particularly for students with disabilities and special needs . ”
10 The counter filed by CBSE explains the salient features of its approach towards gender sensitization and equality education through the human rights and gender studies elective , thus :
the teaching of gender issues encompasses a wide range of questions , which are related to the underlying concepts of gender as they are evolved in various academic disciplines , epistemological approaches and institutional setting of modern educational systems on all levels .
the aims of a possible perspective in teaching gender as gender always contains a socio-political and an academic aspect .
teaching gender also involves the potentials and the problems of gender being a universal individual experience , personal or social in the institutional setting .
this course is intended to make students aware of the ways in which gender is “ taken for granted ” and how gender is learned , the implications of gender for our lives , and prospects for change insofar as men and women are able to combine and / or reject elements of traditional masculinity and femininity .
the course will look at gender within the context of different social institutions ( e.g. the family , the workplace , education , etc . ) and look at ways in which gender roles are maintained by these institutions and / or effectively learned though socialization .
11 CBSE has also stated that the new textbooks of NCERT , following the integrated approach , have included content that provides students with an opportunity to focus on personal , social , constitutional and humane values .
illustrations have been furnished to the Court of the specific chapters devoted to inculcating these values in textbooks prescribed for various subjects including Geography , Social Science , History , Chemistry , Biology and Mathematics .
a resource book entitled “ Ways to Peace ” has been written for teachers to promote attitudes , values and skills necessary for living in harmony with oneself and others .
12 In December 2012 , NCERT developed a framework titled “ Education for Values in Schools ” in consultation with various stakeholders such as principals , teachers and educationists .
the Framework deals with the need for shifting from conventional pedagogy to a new pedagogy of values by adopting what is described as a ‘ whole school approach ’ to education focusing on core values .
CBSE has particularly emphasised the following :
( I ) Co-curricular activities , such as discussions , debates , exhibitions , projects , skits , celebration of important days , such as earth day , environment days , national education days , Heritage India Quiz , morning assemblies , birthdays of leaders such as Swami Vivekananda , Rabindra Nath Tagore , etc. taking up community service , adult education drive , rallies and walks for noble causes .
( II ) Fundamental rights and duties , and Directive Principles of State Policy form part of the Social Science syllabus for Class VIII and Class XI , Political Science .
( iii ) Brought out various publications for inculcation of values among children .
the Board has specifically focused on Article 51A of the Constitution as these values are counted in the performance of students .
schools are bound to inculcate them by conducting curricular , cross-curricular group activities and projects .
13 The petitioner essentially invokes the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 32 for seeking a mandamus for the introduction of moral science as a separate subject in the school curriculum .
14 There can be no gain-saying the fact that moral values are an integral component of value based education .
the purpose of education is to engender in the young , a spirit of enquiry , a desire for knowledge and a sense of values .
among those values are the fundamental values on which our constitutional core is founded : liberty , equality and the dignity of each individual .
education also includes the creation of responsible and informed citizens conscious both of their rights and of their duties to others .
15 Education is an important instrument towards the development of the individual as indeed , it is a vital instrument in nation building .
technology has effaced conventional barriers and the world has become a globally networked community of information ideas .
the challenges which confront the system of education have evolved rapidly , perhaps too rapidly for our educational system to develop pragmatic solutions to meet them .
16 The issue before the Court is whether a mandamus of this nature can be issued by the Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction in the public interest .
17 While there can be no dispute about the need of providing value based education , what form this should take and the manner in which values should be inculcated ought not to be ordained by the court .
the court singularly lacks the expertise to do so .
the petitioner has a grouse about what she describes as the pervading culture of materialism in our society .
the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 32 is not a panacea for all ills but a remedy for the violation of fundamental rights .
the remedies for such perceived grievances as the petitioner has about the dominant presence of materialism must lie elsewhere and it is for those who have the competence and the constitutional duty to lay down and implement educational policies to deal with such problems .
18 There is a tendency on the part of public interest petitioners to assume that every good thing which society should aspire to achieve can be achieved through the instrumentality of the court .
the judicial process provides remedies for constitutional or legal infractions .
public interest litigation allows a relaxation of the strict rules of locus standi .
however , the court must necessarily abide the parameters which govern a nuanced exercise of judicial power .
hence , where an effort is made to bring issues of governance before the court , the basic touch stone on which the invocation of jurisdiction must rest is whether the issue can be addressed within the framework of law or the Constitution .
matters of policy are entrusted to the executive arm of the State . the court is concerned with the preservation of the rule of law .
19 This petition is illustrative of matters which lie beyond the province of judicial review .
whether children pursuing their education from classes I to XII should be saddled with a separate course of moral science is not for the court to decide .
whether a value based educational system would best be subserved by including a separate subject on moral science or whether value based teaching should traverse the entire gamut of a prescribed curriculum is a matter which cannot be resolved by applying settled norms of judicial review .
these are matters which cannot be determined in the exercise of the jurisdiction of the court under Article 32 .
20 The argument on morality seems attractive to those - like the well meaning petitioner -who lament the decadence of civilisation .
combine morality with the need to redefine the values which a society wishes for its young and you have a seemingly persuasive argument in support .
the difficulty in a court mandated acceptance of this argument is precisely its inability to unravel the complexities in the position and the answers which it proposes .
21 Morality is one and , however important it may sound to some , it still is only one element in the composition of values that a just society must pursue .
there are other equally significant values which a democratic society may wish for education to impart to its young .
among those is the acceptance of a plurality and diversity of ideas , images and faiths which unfortunately faces global threats .
then again , equally important is the need to foster tolerance of those who hold radically differing views , empathy for those whom the economic and social milieu has cast away to the margins , a sense of compassion and a realisation of the innate humanity which dwells in each human being .
value based education must enable our young to be aware of the horrible consequences of prejudice , hate and discrimination that continue to threaten people and societies the world over .
morality as a defining concept of spreading values may run the risk of being dangerously one sided , exposing young citizens to the same dogma which those who decry the creed of materialism seek to change . moreover , morality itself is a notion which has varying hues .
22 It is unrealistic for the court to assume that it can provide solutions to vexed issues which involve drawing balances between conflicting dimensions that travel beyond the legal plane .
courts are concerned with issues of constitutionality and legality .
it is difficult to perceive how matters to which solutions may traverse the fields of ideology , social theory , policy making and experimentation can be regulated by this court such as by issuing a mandamus to enforce a scheme of instruction in a particular subject in school education .
should a subject be taught at all ?
should a set of values or a line of enquiry and knowledge be incorporated as a separate subject of discourse in an educational system ?
would a horizontal integration of a given set of values across existing subjects better achieve a desirable result ?
is it at all desirable to impose another subject of study upon the already burdened school curriculum ?
23 These are vexed issues to which more than one solution may appear just .
that is exactly the reason why a resolution of such matters must rest with those who have the responsibility to teach and govern over matters of education .
every good that is perceived to be in the interest of society cannot be mandated by the court .
nor is the judicial process an answer to every social ill which a public interest petitioner perceives .
a matter such as the present to which a solution does not rest in a legal or constitutional framework is incapable of being dealt with in terms of judicially manageable standards .
24 In any event , we have adverted at some length to the response which has been filed by CBSE , which has also been adopted by the Union of India , as reflective of its position .
the issue whether an alternative approach would better subserve the concern for providing value based education is not a matter for the court to evaluate .
25 For these reasons , we find no merit in the Writ Petition .
the Petition shall accordingly stand dismissed .
the applications for impleadment and intervention are disposed of accordingly .
Shahid Khan vs State Of Rajasthan on 2 March , 2016
these three appeals are preferred against the judgment dated 20.12.2006 , passed by the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jaipur in DB Criminal Appeal No.1001 of 2003 .
2 . the appellants in DB Criminal Appeal No.1001 of 2003 are accused nos.2 to 5 in the Sessions case no.31 of 2003 on the file of the Special Judge , SC / ST ( POA ) , Jhalawar and they were tried with accused no.1 for alleged offences under Sections 147 , 148 , 302 / 149 and 397 Indian Penal Code .
the Sessions Court found accused no.1 not guilty of all the charges and found accused nos . 2 to 5 not guilty of the charge under Section 397 .
at the same time Sessions Court convicted accused nos . 2 to 5 for the offence under Section 148 and sentenced them each to undergo Simple imprisonment for 2 years with fine of Rs.500 and in default to undergo further simple imprisonment for one month and convicted them under Section 302 / 149 and sentenced them each to undergo life imprisonment with fine of Rs.2000 and in default to undergo simple imprisonment for six months .
3 . aggrieved by this conviction and sentence , accused nos . 2 to 5 preferred appeal being DB Criminal Appeal No.1001 of 2003 , before the High Court of Rajasthan at Jaipur Bench .
during pendency of appeal , appellant / A3 Irfan Ali died and his appeal abated .
the High Court by its judgment dated 20.12.2006 dismissed the appeal preferred by the appellants .
challenging the same accused nos.2 , 4 and 5 have preferred present appeals .
4 . the prosecution case as it discerned from the records is briefly , as follows : PW 19 Anil Kumar Jain is the brother of deceased Ashok Kumar .
on 22.1.2001 he submitted Exh . P34 complaint at Police Station Kotwali Jhalawar stating that Ashok Kumar was looking after the factory of Kota stones and the contract of royalty of toll tax was obtained by Abdul Khalid in which his brother Ashok Kumar was also a partner .
it is further stated that Khalid was arrested for committing the murder of Kallu and Ashok Kumar gave assistance to Khalid .
due to this reason on 22.1.2001 companions of Kallu came to the factory and murdered Ashok Kumar .
it is further stated therein that as per the information provided by PW 20 Lal Chand the accused were five in number and they caused injuries to Ashok Kumar with sword and knife .
PW 25 Mirza Majid Beg came from Kota to Jhalawar to meet Ashok Kumar on the occurrence day , and he and his driver PW 24 Mohamed Shakir saw the occurrence in which the accused inflicted injuries with weapons on Ashok Kumar .
due to fear they hid themselves in the factory .
PW 19 Anil Kumar Jain took injured Ashok Kumar in the Maruti car to hospital at Jhalawar where he was declared dead .
on the written complaint of PW 19 Anil Kumar Jain a case under Sections 147 , 148 302 / 149 and 448 IPC was registered and investigation commenced .
PW 17 Dr. Arvind Kumar Bohra conducted autopsy on the body of Ashok Kumar and found the following ante-mortem injuries :
1 . incised wound 2 ड ़ x ड ़ x bone deep horizontally mid of forehead .
2 . abrasion 3 ड ़ long in front and over the pinna of left ear .
3 . stab incised wound 2 ” X ड ़ ” X cavity deep omentum and fresh blood come out from wound vertically Rt para umbilicus region .
4 . stab incised wound 2 ” X ड ़ ” X cavity deep . vertically oblique omenten and fresh blood comes out left para umbilicus part of abdomen .
5 . stab incised wound 2 ” X ड ़ ” X cavity deep omentum and fresh bleeding present vertically left renal region of abdomen .
6 . stab incised wound 2 ” X ड ़ ” X cavity deep oblique ड ़ ” below lower costal margin left Hypocondrium of abdomen .
7 . incised wound 1 ” X ¼ ” x skin deep oblique lat . aspect of middle of left thigh .
he issued Exh.P21 post-mortem report by expressing opinion that the cause of death was hemorrhagic shock as a result of cutting of pedicle of spleen omental and mesenteric vessels .
5 . the investigation officer examined the witnesses , arrested the accused and recovered weapons by drawing the necessary memos and on completion of the investigation filed the charge-sheet .
the Sessions Court on framing of charges conducted the trial in which prosecution examined 28 witnesses and marked documents and the defence examined 2 witnesses on their side .
the trial court acquitted accused No.1 of all the charges and convicted accused Nos. 2 to 5 as stated supra .
on appeal the High Court confirmed the conviction and sentence .
aggrieved by the same the present appeals have been preferred .
6 . Mr. Sushil Kumar Jain , Senior Advocate appearing for the appellants contended that PW 25 Mirza Majid Beg and his driver PW 24 Mohamed Shakir who claimed to have witnessed the occurrence are chance witnesses whose presence at the place of occurrence is doubtful and their conduct in not informing the relatives of the deceased and not lodging police complaint is quite unnatural and their statements were recorded after 3 days of the occurrence for which there is no explanation and the prosecution case was conceived and constructed after a good deal of deliberation and it is doubtful .
it is further contended by him that PW 25 Mirza Majid Beg implicated the appellants falsely because his son-in-law Khalid was tried for committing the murder of Kallu and in the said case the present appellant-Banti gave evidence against him as prosecution witness , resulting in conviction .
it is his further submission that the courts below have erroneously believed the uncorroborated testimonies of the eye-witnesses and conviction and sentence imposed on the appellants are not sustainable in law and liable to be set aside .
in support of his submission reliance was placed on various decisions of this Court .
7 . per contra the learned counsel appearing for the respondent contended that the presence of the eye-witnesses at the time of occurrence is established and their testimonies have rightly been relied upon by the courts below for convicting the appellants and the impugned judgment is sustainable .
8 . Ashok Kumar died of homicidal violence is evident from the medical evidence adduced in the case .
Arvind Kumar Bohra who conducted post mortem found 4 stab incised wounds in the abdomen and 2 incised wounds on forehead and left thigh .
PW 17 Dr. Exh.P21 is the post-mortem report issued by him in which he has opined that the cause of death was hemorrhagic shock as a result of cutting of pedicle of spleen omental and mesenteric vessels .
from the above it is clear that Ashok Kumar died of injuries sustained in the occurrence .
9 . the prosecution case is that the appellants ( Accused Nos.2 , 4 and 5 ) alongwith other accused inflicted injuries with sword and knife to Ashok Kumar .
during the trial PW 20 Lal Chand , PW 24 Mohammad Shakir and PW 25 Mirza Majid Beg were examined as having witnessed the occurrence .
PW 20 Lal Chand did not support the prosecution case and was declared hostile .
PW 25 Mirza Majid Beg in his testimony has stated that on 22.1.2001 he started from Kota at 10 O ’ clock and reached Jhalawar at about 12 O ’ clock in his Maruti Van driven by his driver PW 24 Shakir and halted for 5-10 minutes in the Toll Post and then went to the factory of Ashok Kumar to meet him and on reaching there they heard the sound of crying and they got down from the vehicle and ran inside the factory and saw accused no.2 Banti and accused no.4 Shahid Khan with daggers in their hand and accused no.5 Mansoor with Gupti type weapon and all the accused were attacking Ashok Kumar with the said weapons .
according to him he and his driver stood adjacent to the quarter wall inside the factory and saw the occurrence and thereafter they ran away from the said place to Toll Tax and boarded a tanker lorry and reached the hospital at Jhalawar and they found their Maruti vehicle parked in the hospital and they drove from there directly to Kota in the said vehicle .
it is the testimony of PW 24 Mohamed Shakir that on 22.1.2001 he drove the Maruti van of PW 25 Mirza Majid Beg from Kota to Jhalawar and when they reached the factory of Ashok Kumar they heard the sound of crying and both of them got down and rushed inside the factory and saw the appellants and other accused attacking Ashok Kumar with knife and they ran to the backside of the factory and hid themselves near the wall and after 5- 10 minutes they came out and went to the Toll Tax check post and by taking a lift in a truck they reached Jhalawar hospital and on seeing their car there , both of them drove back to Kota .
10 . both the above witnesses are residents of Kota which is at a distance of about 150 kms. from Jhalawar town .
according to PW 25 Mirza Majid Beg he went to Jhalawar to meet Ashok Kumar and on reaching the factory at 1.00 p.m. they happened to witness the occurrence .
it is relevant to point out that PW 9 Anwar and PW 19 Anil Kumar Jain , who on intimation rushed to the occurrence place , did not state that they saw PW 25 Mirza Majid Beg and PW 24 Mohamed Shakir in the occurrence place.It is only PW 19 Anil Kumar Jain with the help of PW 9 Anwar and PW 20 Lal Chand lifted injured Ashok Kumar and put in the Maruti vehicle and took him to Jhalawar hospital , where he was declared dead .
thereafter PW 19 Anil Kumar Jain went to the Police Station and lodged the written complaint .
in the said complaint , the names of the assailants are not mentioned and also the names of the persons who were present during the occurrence are not mentioned .
PW 25 Mirza Majid Beg and PW 24 Mohamed Shakir have stated in their cross examination that they did not help PW 9 Anwar and PW 19 Anil Kumar Jain to shift the injured to the hospital and they rushed towards Toll Tax and reached the hospital in a truck and on seeing their car , without entering the hospital , they drove to Kota and they did not inform any one about the occurrence and they did not also go to the Police Station for lodging the complaint .
the High Court in the impugned judgment has concluded that the presence of PW 25 Mirza Majid Beg is established in view of the fact that his Maruti van was used for shifting injured to the hospital .
there was nothing on record to show the Maruti vehicle used for transporting Ashok Kumar to the hospital belonged to PW 25 Mirza Majid Beg .
in fact PW 19 Anil Kumar Jain in his cross examination has stated that he did not know the Registration number of the Maruti van in which Ashok Kumar was taken to hospital and he also did not know whose vehicle it was .
in other words , nothing is stood established by the use of this Maruti vehicle for transporting to the injured to the hospital and in any event this will not clinch the presence of PW 25 Mirza Majid Beg at the time of occurrence .
PW 25 Mirza Majid Beg and PW 24 Mohamed Shakir slipping away unnoticed by the others particularly after the alleged attack is utterly unbelievable .
it appears unreal .
they are not strange to expect and they did not render any help for shifting the injured to the hospital nor had the courtesy to go inside the hospital to ascertain the condition and also did not inform the occurrence to the police .
the aspect of fear is without any foundation and is not supported by any evidence of act or conduct .
this plea does not impress us .
in this context , it is relevant to point out that PW 25 Mirza Majid Beg has admitted that he is a history-sheeter , and two cases under NDPS Act were imposed on him and he was also bound down under Section 110 Cr.P.C.
11 . the statements of PW 25 Mirza Majid Beg and PW 24 Mohamed Shakir were recorded after 3 days of the occurrence .
no explanation is forthcoming as to why they are not examined for 3 days .
it is also not known as to how the police came to know that these witnesses saw the occurrence .
the delay in recording the statements casts a serious doubt about their being eye-witnesses to the occurrence .
it may suggest that the investigating officer was deliberately marking time with a view to decide about the shape to be given to the case and the eye-witnesses to be introduced .
the circumstances in this case lend such significance to this delay .
PW 25 Mirza Majid Beg and PW 24 Mohamed Shakir , in view of their unexplained silence and delayed statement to the police , does not appear to us to be wholly reliable witnesses .
there is no corroboration of their evidence from any other independent source either .
we find it rather unsafe to rely upon their evidence only to uphold the conviction and sentence of the appellants .
the High Court has failed to advert to the contentions raised by the appellants and re-appreciate the evidence thereby resulting in miscarriage of justice .
in our opinion , the case against the appellants has not been proved beyond reasonable doubt .
12 . consequently , the appeals are allowed and the conviction and sentence of the appellants is hereby set aside .
the appellants are on bail .
their bail bonds shall stand discharged .
Ajay Singh And Anr And Etc vs State Of Chhattisgarh And Anr on 6 January , 2017
performance of judicial duty in the manner prescribed by law is fundamental to the concept of rule of law in a democratic State .
it has been quite often said and , rightly so , that the judiciary is the protector and preserver of rule of law .
effective functioning of the said sacrosanct duty has been entrusted to the judiciary and that entrustment expects the courts to conduct the judicial proceeding with dignity , objectivity and rationality and finally determine the same in accordance with law .
errors are bound to occur but there cannot be deliberate peccability which can never be countenanced .
the plinth of justice dispensation system is founded on the faith , trust and confidence of the people and nothing can be allowed to contaminate and corrode the same .
a litigant who comes to a court of law expects that inherent and essential principles of adjudication like adherence to doctrine of audi alteram partem , rules pertaining to fundamental adjective and seminal substantive law shall be followed and ultimately there shall be a reasoned verdict .
when the accused faces a charge in a court of law , he expects a fair trial .
the victim whose grievance and agony have given rise to the trial also expects that justice should be done in accordance with law .
thus , a fair trial leading to a judgment is necessitous in law and that is the assurance that is thought of on both sides .
the exponent on behalf of the accused cannot be permitted to command the trial as desired by his philosophy of trial on the plea of fair trial and similarly , the proponent on behalf of the victim should not always be allowed to ventilate the grievance that his cause has not been fairly dealt with in the name of fair trial .
therefore , the concept of expediency and fair trial is quite applicable to the accused as well as to the victim .
the result of such trial is to end in a judgment as required to be pronounced in accordance with law.And , that is how the stability of the creditability in the institution is maintained .
2 . the above prefatory note has relevance , a significant one , to the case at hand .
to appreciate the controversy , certain facts are requisite to be noted .
the marriage between the appellant No. 1 and Ruby Singh , the deceased , was solemnized according to Hindu rites on 22.06.1997 .
she committed suicide at her matrimonial home on 01.12.1998 .
Kameshwar Pratap lodged FIR No. 194 / 98 at Police Station Lakhanpur , Distt . Sarguja against Ajay Singh ( husband ) , Sureshwar Singh ( father-in-law ) , Dhanwanti Devi ( mother-in-law ) and Kiran Singh ( sister-in-law ) for offences punishable under Section 304B , 34 of the Indian Penal Code ( IPC ) and other offences .
after the criminal law was set in motion , investigating agency after commencement of investigation and after completion thereof laid charge sheet under Sections 304B , 498A / 34 , 328 IPC read with Section 3 / 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act , 1961 against the accused persons before the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate , Ambikapur , who , in turn , committed the matter to the Court of Session and eventually the matter was tried by Second Additional Sessions Judge , Ambikapur .
we are , in the present case , not concerned with how many witnesses were examined by the trial court or how the trial continued .
what needs to be stated is that the learned trial Judge passed an order in the order sheet that recorded that the accused persons had been acquitted as per the judgment separately typed , signed and dated .
3 . a member of the State Bar Council sent a complaint to the Registry of the High Court of Chhattisgarh , Bilaspur alleging that learned trial judge had acquitted the accused persons but no judgment had been rendered .
the Registrar ( Vigilance ) of the High Court issued a memorandum to the District and Sessions Judge , Surguja at Ambikapur on 18.02.2008 to inquire into the matter and submit a report .
the concerned District and Sessions Judge submitted the report to the High Court on the same date stating that no judgments were found in the records of such cases .
it has also been brought to the notice of the High Court that in sessions trials being Sessions Trial No. 148 of 1999 and Sessions Trial No. 71 of 1995 though the same trial judge had purportedly delivered the judgments but they were not available on record as the judgments had not actually been dictated , dated or signed .
D . thereafter the matter was placed before the Full Court of the High Court on 04.03.2008 on which date a resolution was passed placing the concerned trial judge under suspension in contemplation of a departmental inquiry .
at the same time , the Full Court took the decision to transfer the cases in question from the concerned trial judge to the file of District and Sessions Judge , Surguja at Ambikapur for rehearing and disposal .
it is worthy to note here that the concerned officer was put under suspension and after completion of inquiry was imposed with the punishment of compulsory retirement on 22.03.2011 .
we make it clear that we are not concerned with the said punishment in the case .
4 . after the decision was taken for transferring the cases by the Full Court for rehearing , three writ petitions forming the subject matter of Writ Petition ( Criminal ) Nos. 2796 of 2008 , 2238 of 2008 and 276 of 2010 were filed . the accused in Sessions Trial No. 148 of 1999 filed Writ Petition ( Criminal ) Nos. 2796 of 2008 and 2238 of 2008 and accused in Sessions Trial No. 71 of 1995 filed the other writ petition , that is , Writ Petition ( Criminal ) No. 276 of 2010 .
5 . the controversy really centers around two issues , namely , whether the learned trial judge had really pronounced the judgment of acquittal on 31.10.2007 and whether the High Court could have in exercise of its administrative power treated the trial as pending and transferred the same from the Court of Second Additional Sessions Judge , Ambikapur to the Court of District and Sessions Judge , Surguja at Ambikapur for rehearing and disposal .
6 . it is urged by learned counsel for the appellants that the nature of order passed by the learned trial judge would amount to a judgment and in the absence of any appeal preferred by the State there could not have been a direction for rehearing of the sessions case as such action runs contrary to the provisions of CrPC .
learned counsel would submit that the High Court in exercise of power of the superintendence could not have transferred the case treating it as pending on its administrative side .
to bolster the said submission he has placed reliance on Ouseph Mathai &amp; others v. M. Abdul Khadir &#91; 1 &#93; , Essen Deinki v. Rajiv Kumar and Surya Dev Rai v. Ram Chander Rai and others .
7 . Mr. C.D. Singh , learned counsel for the State submitted that the approach of the High Court is absolutely infallible and does not warrant any interference by this Court .
8 . to appreciate the controversy , it is necessary to refer to the order sheet in Sessions Trial No. 71 of 1995 .
the trial judge on 28.1.2008 had passed the following order :
State represented by Shri Rajesh Tiwari , A.G.P.
accused along with their Counsel Shri Arvind Mehta , Advocate The judgment has been typed separately .
the same has been dated , signed and announced .
Resultantly , Accused T.P. Ratre is acquitted of the charge under Section 306 IPC .
a copy of this judgment be sent to the District Magistrate , Surguja ( Ambikapur ) through A.G.P.
proceedings completed .
the result be noted in the register and the record be sent to the Record Room .
be it noted , in the other Sessions Trial , i.e. , Sessions Trial No. 148 of 1999 almost similar order has been passed .
be it stated , apart from the aforesaid order , as per the enquiry conducted by the learned District Judge , there was nothing on record .
the trial judge had not dictated the order in open court .
in such a situation , it is to be determined whether the judgment had been delivered by the trial judge or not .
9 . Chapter XVIII of CrPC provides for trial before a court of session .
Section 227 empowers the trial judge to discharge the accused after hearing the submissions of the accused and the prosecution and on being satisfied that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused .
the key words of the Section are “ not sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused ” .
interpreting the said provision , the Court in P. Vijayan v. State of Kerala and another &#91; 4 &#93; has held that the Judge is not a mere post office to frame the charge at the behest of the prosecution , but has to exercise his judicial mind to the facts of the case in order to determine whether a case for trial has been made out by the prosecution .
in assessing this fact , it is not necessary for the court to enter into the pros and cons of the matter or into a weighing and balancing of evidence and probabilities which is really the function of the court , after the trial starts .
at the stage of Section 227 , the Judge has merely to sift the evidence in order to find out whether or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused .
in other words , the sufficiency of ground would take within its fold the nature of the evidence recorded by the police or the documents produced before the court which ex facie disclose that there are suspicious circumstances against the accused so as to frame a charge against him .
10 . Section 228 empowers the trial judge to frame the charge .
Section 229 provides if the accused pleads guilty , the Judge shall record the plea and may , in his discretion , convict him thereon .
Section 230 provides for date for prosecution evidence .
Section 231 deals with the evidence for prosecution .
Section 232 provides that if , after taking the evidence for the prosecution , examining the accused and hearing the prosecution the defence on the point , the Judge considers that there is no evidence that the accused committed the offence , the Judge shall record an order of acquittal .
Section 233 stipulates that where the accused is not acquitted under Section 232 he shall be called upon to enter on his defence and adduce any evidence he may have in support thereof .
Section 234 provides for arguments .
Section 235 which provides for judgment of acquittal or conviction reads as follows :
235 . judgment of acquittal or conviction . – ( 1 ) After hearing arguments and points of law ( if any ) , the Judge shall give a judgment in the case .
( 2 ) If the accused is convicted , the Judge shall , unless he proceeds in accordance with the provisions of section 360 , hear the accused on the question of sentence , and then pass sentence on him according to law .
11 . Chapter XXIV provides for general provisions as to inquiries and trials .
Chapter XXVII deals with the judgment .
Section 353 lays down the procedure for pronouncement of the judgment .
the said provision reads as follows :
353 . judgment - ( 1 ) The judgment in every trial in any Criminal Court of original jurisdiction shall be pronounced in open Court by the presiding officer immediately after the termination of the trial or at some subsequent time of which notice shall be given to the parties or their pleaders , -
( a ) by delivering the whole of the judgment ; or
( b ) by reading out the whole of the judgment ; or
( C ) by reading out the operative part of the judgment and explaining the substance of the judgment in a language which is understood by the accused or his pleader .
( 2 ) Where the judgment is delivered under clause ( a ) of sub-section ( 1 ) , the presiding officer shall cause it to be taken down in short-hand , sign the transcript and every page thereof as soon as it is made ready , and write on it the date of the delivery of the judgment in open Court .
( 3 ) Where the judgment or the operative part thereof is read out under clause ( b ) or clause ( c ) of sub- section ( 1 ) , as the case may be , it shall be dated and signed by the presiding officer in open Court , and if it is not written with his own hand , every page of the judgment shall be signed by him .
( 4 ) Where the judgment is pronounced in the manner specified in clause ( c ) of sub-section ( 1 ) , the whole judgment or a copy thereof shall be immediately made available for the perusal of the parties or their pleaders free of cost .
( 5 ) If the accused is in custody , he shall be brought up to hear the judgment pronounced .
( 6 ) If the accused is not in custody , he shall be required by the Court to attend to hear the judgment pronounced , except where his personal attendance during the trial has been dispensed with and the sentence is one of fine only or he is acquitted :
provided that , where there are more accused than one , and one or more of them do not attend the Court on the date on which the judgment is to be pronounced , the presiding officer may , in order to avoid undue delay in the disposal of the case , pronounce the judgment notwithstanding their absence .
( 7 ) No judgment delivered by any Criminal Court shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only of the absence of any party or his pleader on the day or from the place notified for the delivery thereof , or of any omission to serve , or defect in serving , on the parties or their pleaders , or any of them , the notice of such day and place .
( 8 ) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit in any way the extent of the provisions of section 465 .
12 . Section 354 provides for language and contents of the judgment .
the said provision reads as follows :
354 . language and contents of judgment.- ( 1 ) Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Code , every judgment referred to in section 353 , -
( a ) shall be written in the language of the Court ;
( b ) shall contain the point or points for determination , the decision thereon and the reasons for the decision ;
( C ) shall specify the offence ( if any ) of which , and the section of the Indian Penal Code ( 45 of 1860 ) or other law under which , the accused is convicted and the punishment to which he is sentenced ;
( D ) if it be a judgment of acquittal , shall state the offence of which the accused is acquitted and direct that he be set at liberty .
( 2 ) When the conviction is under the Indian Penal Code ( 45 of 1860 ) , and it is doubtful under which of two sections , or under which of two parts of the same section , of that Code the offence falls , the Court shall distinctly express the same , and pass judgment in the alternative .
( 3 ) When the conviction is for an offence punishable with death or , in the alternative , with imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of years , the judgment shall state the reasons for the sentence awarded , and , in the case of sentence of death , the special reasons for such sentence .
( 4 ) When the conviction is for an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term of one year or more , but the Court imposes a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three months , it shall record its reasons for awarding such sentence , unless the sentence is one of imprisonment till the rising of the Court or unless the case was tried summarily under the provisions of this Code .
( 5 ) When any person is sentenced to death , the sentence shall direct that he be hanged by the neck till he is dead .
( 6 ) Every order under section 117 or sub-section ( 2 ) of section 138 and every final order made under section 125 , section 145 or section 147 shall contain the point or points for determination , the decision thereon and the reasons for the decision .
13 . Section 362 has the heading “ Court not to alter judgment . ”
the said provision is as follows :
362 . Court not to alter judgment . ? save as otherwise provided by this Code or by any other law for the time being in force , no Court , when it has signed its judgment or final order disposing of a case , shall alter or review the same except to correct a clerical or arithmetical error .
14 . interpreting the said provision in the context of exercise of inherent power of the High Court under Section 482 CrPC this Court in Smt . Sooraj Devi v. Pyare Lal and another held thus :
5 . the appellant points out that he invoked the inherent power of the High Court saved by Section 482 of the Code and that notwithstanding the prohibition imposed by Section 362 the High Court had power to grant relief .
now it is well settled that the inherent power of the court cannot be exercised for doing that which is specifically prohibited by the Code .
it is true that the prohibition in Section 362 against the court altering or reviewing its judgment is subject to what is “ otherwise provided by this Court or by any other law for the time being in force .
those words , however , refer to those provisions only where the court has been expressly authorised by the Code or other law to alter or review its judgment .
15 . Section 363 provides copy of judgment to be given to the accused and other persons .
Section 364 provides for the situation where the judgment requires to be translated .
16 . it is apposite to note that though CrPC does not define the term “ judgment ” , yet it has clearly laid down how the judgment is to be pronounced .
the provisions clearly spell out that it is imperative on the part of the learned trial judge to pronounce the judgment in open court by delivering the whole of the judgment or by reading out the whole of the judgment or by reading out the operative part of the judgment and explaining the substance of the judgment in a language which is understood by the accused or his pleader .
17 . we have already noted that the judgment was not dictated in open court .
Code of Criminal Procedure provides reading of the operative part of the judgment .
it means that the trial judge may not read the whole of the judgment and may read operative part of the judgment but it does not in any way suggest that the result of the case will be announced and the judgment would not be available on record .
non- availability of judgment , needless to say , can never be a judgment because there is no declaration by way of pronouncement in the open court that the accused has been convicted or acquitted .
AAUI ( Apple Attachment Unit Interface ) is used in a data station on a local area network .
abacus is used to teach counting the childrens .
he abandoned the idea of selling his house .
lack of support forced one to abandon any of the objects
flood forced him to abandon several assets
Indian Railway auctions its abandoned assets .
generally abandoned call takes place due to time on hold , call disconnected by the automated dialer or automatic call distributor or non availability of agent to take the call .
arrangements have to be made to move abandoned cargo elsewhere .
intentionally he abandoned his application
the abandonment of the dilapidated buildings has been started .
abandonment of child without proper reason is an humanitarian crime
due to technical reasons , abandonment of claim is the only option .
the paucity of funding forced for the abandonment of the works .
the fire brigade abated the fire from spreading to other buildings .
the fall in the petrol price abated the inflation slightly .
the Government is taking steps to abate industrial pollution .
this section of the law is now null and void .
he must abate his rancor to win peace
these rules are abated now .
the writ was abated in high court
after the order of judge the property was abated in equal proportion .
abatement of industrial pollution can be reduced by using better technology and policy enforcement .
proper abatement is necessary in family matters .
abatement in central grain food will rise the prices again .
this tablet abates the effect of fever .
the loan repayment amount was considered under abatement by reason of death clause .
the submission of pollution abatement certificate is mandatory for renewal of the license for production .
after the train accident insurance company cleared the insured amount after made by application of bonus .
abatement of duty on imported goods will have softening effect on local market price .
storm forced the govt . for abatement of duty on damaged or deteriorated goods
heavy expenditure on the court case was the cause of abatement of legacies
check by police resulted in abatement of nuisance
increasing unemployment is causing abatement of purchase money with masses .
deteriorating condition of the flat was the main cause f abatement of rent
mutual understandings result in abatement of suit .
mutual understandings result in abatement in litigation obstruction of suit .
filter helps in abatement of water pollution
plea in abatement is not defeat for appellant .
the abaxial surface of a leaf is the underside or side facing away from the stem
this is the dictionary of abbreviations
write down abbreviation of your name
the king was forced to abdicate his throne .
the merged company has agreed for abdiction of their rights on copyrights .
this creates inflammation in the abdomen .
an abdominal operation was performed .
of or pertaining to the abdomen , of the belly , of the stomach area
abdominal approach is infected .
the abdominal cavity is created by this chronic disease .
second abdominal ganglion with side nerves .
please take the measurement of abdominal girth .
he abducted his class fellow
the police has not found the motive behind the abduction of the Manager of the factory by the separatists .
the fluid from the organ had to be extracted by abduction .
abductor coxa is the second of the powerful coxæ muscles .
the abductor muscles of the legs spread the legs away from the midline and away from one another .
the aberrant fluid created certain complexities .
first the aberration of fluid has to be stopped .
he is suffering from mental abnormality
he abetted his friend in the burglary .
abetment of a crime is also an offence
Govt should keep a check on abetment of false returns
he was punished for being an abettor to his friend in a theft case .
he was punished by the court as he was abettor of the offence
the production was in abeyance due to lack of raw material .
he will abide by his decision
his ability to negotiate gained him a lot of profit .
for optional subjects , ability grouping is done and group wise assignments , activities , seminars , discussions , experiments , projects etc . are given .
surplus income has increased ability to invest of the people .
as a result of pay hike , ability to pay has considerably enhanced in case of Govt . employees .
this agreement is not legal ab initio .
abiotic stress is defined as the negative impact of non - living factors on the living organisms
abiotic stress is defined as the negative impact of non - living factors on the living organisms
one should abjure violence
now ABL concept is applied in Tamilnadu , Rajasthan , Chhattisgarh and Other few states of India .
an ablation was performed .
you must be able to speak Hindi for this job .
we need able bodied for this tuff job
only able seaman should go for this voyage
to perform one &apos; s ablution .
due to shortage of sugar in the market , the shopkeepers are charging abnormal price for it .
employees have raised abnormal demand .
there is an abnormal increase of food price due to the increase in the price of petroleum products .
the abnormal method of finance to small entrepreneurs is becoming popular .
the cost of new accounting software asked for in an abnormal price .
this time company got abnormal profit
undefined instructions was the cause of the program &apos; s abnormal termination .
M . D . was contacted when he was aboard .
he was arrested while aboard on an unregistered ship
once this was an abode for him
Government abolished the old law regarding untouchability
punishment of death sentence has been abolished in many countries
the workers protested for the abolition of the corrupted system .
death sentence is on abolition state
the Abolition of posts in the school lead to the shortage of teachers in the school .
abolition of privy purse forced the princes to start some business
announcement for abolition of titles was a set back for the kings
Gandhji was the man behind abolition of untocuhability .
abolition or creation of Legislative Councils in states is matter of state itself .
the aboral surface of a starfish &quot;
the Government has taken several steps to improve the life style of the aboriginals living in Andaman .
he was appointed as aboriginal welfare officer .
she has been given abortifacient .
this drug may have abortifacient effect .
abortion was necessary to save the mother .
as , his attempt proved an abortion .
this was a case of inevitable abortion .
doctors could not diagnose the causes of missed abortion .
he was aware that he was making an abortive attempt
there is no use to waste time in abortive efforts
as , his attempt proved an abortion .
he was responsible for abortive exploration expenses
Pakistan made an abortive trial of atomic bomb
the time which a program takes to close itself is known by the abort timer .
he surrendered when he was about to take step against him
above all it is clear that he is not going to help you
the company requests for exemptions of sale taxes on the basis of above cited cases who have availed exemptions in similar cases .
after repayment of the last instalment of housing loan , retired employee feels above from liability satisfaction .
his house was 20 meters above the ground
the above mentioned officers will be on probation for a period of two years .
one has to take special permission for purchase og goods of above par .
new shares being issued by Housing Bank will be above par value
to fulfill the above quoted conditions is mandatory for this job .
he was referring to the above passage
opinion of auditors may be obtained on provisions made before arriving at profit .
in the organization he is working above the rank of director
possibility of abrasion of coin of high metal value is more .
he was suspended from his service for his abrasive manner .
he is in the business of abrasive wheel
sometimes abreaction is applied to give peace to patients of depression .
he abridged the play because of time constrains .
he abridged the annual report for quick presentation .
he abridges the doses given by the doctor
the abridgement of the play was a crucial task .
on appeal one could obtain order for abridgement of damages .
dialogue writer of the film was engaged in abridgment of the story
this new regulation abridges any of the rights of executive director
John keplin is a abroad resident
the Government has abrogated the TADA Act .
he abrogated the rights guaranteed in the constitution
he abrogated the rights guaranteed in the constitution
the abrogation of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities ( Prevention ) Act ( TADA , 1985 - 94 ) has lead to increase in terrorist acts .
the seeds of abrus precatorius are much valued in native jewelry for their bright coloration .
abscesses on the gums .
an abscission layer is formed composed of parenchyma cells .
he is absconding for the fear of arrest
the accountant absconded with the cash from the safe .
the chief cluprit in this fraud was an absconder .
the absconder was trapped by the police .
he has been declared a absconding debtor by the bank .
he is in the list of absconding persons .
in the absence of the Director , the administrative responsibilities shall be discharged by the Deputy Director .
Ashok is under the category of absence abroad for last two years
there is no provision of absence allowance in the new rules .
his salary was deducted due to his absence from the duty without leave .
he is absent due to illness for last two months
he came in the house in absence of the owner .
due to absence of evidence , he could not declared guilty
due to absence of director no decision was taken
he is absent without leave for last two months
he was absent in the physics class yesterday .
he deliberately absented himself from the meeting
the bank filed a case against the absent debtor .
the disciplinary actions will be taken against the regular absentees .
there is always negative image of absentees .
the employees who have served 5 years and more in the Department are entitled for absentee allowance .
absentee capitalism plays an important role in capital market .
of late absenteeism rate has shown increasing trend .
in urban areas large number of dwelling units are owned by absentee owners .
the absentee statement should contain the details of salary and leave salary entitlement .
please send absentee statement soon .
for the last 10 days , he is the state of absence from duty
Chief accountant was absent on duty in his district
Chief accountant was absent otherwise than on duty
he was physically absent in the class
the employee remained absent without leave .
he is the absolute authority in this matter
this is the absolute proof of his ignorance
this is the absolute product
I have absolute trust in my father
ethyl alcohol with not more than 1 % of water by weight is called absolute alcohol .
certain financial instruments require absolute acceptance .
a user may know the exact storage location of a file through absolute addressing .
cautions investors who buy good shares while rates are low are always in absolute advantageous position .
please draw one consolidated bill for absolute amount .
absolute assembler is fully based on a company or person &apos; s requirement .
absolute assignment of property facilities its transfer at a later date .
local bodies enjoy absolute authority in certain matters .
a good website developer always checks the absolute codes and if necessary he changed it with new one .
although he is very young but he has mastery in absolute coding .
please give the absolute command for smooth functioning of the system .
an absolute contract for maintenance of generator may be awarded . .
absolute conveyance is the best method for transferring rights in property .
those who are cautious with moral values form their absolute conviction towards devotion of duty .
a basic example of an absolute coordinate would be the lower left corner of your display .
he is suffered from absolute deafness
she discharged her services absolutely
she acted with absolute discretion
if the exact value is 50 and the approximation is 49 . 9 , then the absolute error is 0 . 1 .
absolute estate is a better form of security .
absolute estimation of initial concentrations of amplicon .
the absolute family wages average in India is very low .
I have an absolute interest in service to nation .
the absolute liability of the government is to provide basic needs to all the citizens
when a computer is first tuned on or restarted , a special type of absolute loader , called bootstrap loader is executed .
by default the absolute location of an installed software or program is C : \ Program Files .
you are absolutely right
don ’ t you agree ? Oh ! absolutely !
convicted criminals are absolutely debarred and foreclosed from voting in election
he was not granted bail , absolutely or conditionally .
this rule absolutely retains the transfer of goods
his case was transferred absolutely to other court
his interests are absolutely vested in this act of mine .
the agreement was declared absolutely void in law
Congress could not get absolute majority in last elections .
I have a problem with setting my Graphire4 tablet to absolute mode .
telecasting of sports events is an absolute monopoly of sports channels .
absolute necessities is a relative term in different context .
the loan given to Ramsingh was conditional .
the manager of the company was given absolute order of discharge in each and every matter
he is the absolute owner of this grand house
the absolute ownership of this company is given to the government .
f : \ DMani \ Songs \ MySongs is the absolute pathname of a file named MySongs , which is located in the root directory F .
absolute power is considered to be behind dictatorship
the financial controller of the company has absolute power of disposition
member of parliament has some absolute privileges .
some ministers have some absolute privileges in their departments
he is an expert of absolute programming of JAVA .
your computer works because of Absolute programming , without it computers are useless .
absolute property has been defined in transfer of Property Act .
all the rights are not privileges
under absolute sale receipt of sale money by the seller is an essential element .
absolute surplus is credited to a separate account .
in programming , a mathematical function that always returns a positive number . for example , ABS ( 25 - 100 ) yields 75 , not - 75 .
the properties bought by an individual get the absolute title of it .
he has given an absolute undertaking that the loan would be repaid
absolute value of the article has to be worked out as per fixed norms .
the absolute vector difference is memorised as the phonetic distance between two phonemes .
absolute warranty of seaworthiness is described in Indian carriage of goods by sea Act
the court absolved the Director of all the corruption charges brought against him .
the enquiry absolved the driver from liability .
absorption of extra expenditure is not possible in the current year .
Pune is not ready to absorb the influx of migrant employees .
the sponge absorbed the water .
there is a big dispute between India and China on absorbed areas .
amount of absorbed capital has been very low .
there were hundreds of absorbed employees who were not given increment .
40 % of the surplus employees have now been part of the absorbed labour in new project .
some banks have not been able to utilise absorbed liquidity in expansion of loan portfolio .
hundreds of absorbed posts were there after the end of dutch rule in goa
information relating to absorbed shares of the acquired company be placed before general meeting .
this absorbent will remove the antibodies from the serum .
absorbing banking co . has issued one share against five shares to the share holders of absorbed company
in 1966 Himachal Pradesh was absorbing state for many posts of Joint Punjab
casual workers were absorbed in regular service after 10 years
the State Government has introduced a new Law prohibiting further absorption of immigrants .
absorption of nutrients by the body has been decreased .
the absorption of bodies in a whirlpool , the absorption of a smaller tribe into a larger .
the absorption of A compnay into B company has been completed .
absorption of credit is a difficult task for the industrial companies during slow - down period .
absorption property is mainly used for set theory or for a Boolean algebra .
the absorptive capacity of manufacturing companies has been reducing due to slow down in demand .
thus , we predicted that the absorptive root system would be primary .
the workers who abstained from the work are suspended .
at the last election he abstained from voting .
he has been advised to abstain from alcohol
five votes in favor of the proposal , three against and two abstentions .
the project suffered greatly due to his abstention from work .
due to abstinence he was considered as best person to be the chairman
abstinence from alcohol is good for his diabetes .
abstinence also causes some psychological disorder .
during the period of economic slowdown many lenders adopt abstinence theory of interest .
this is the abstarct of my reseach thesis .
his idea is still abstract enough to be applied in practical field .
1 g . of abstract is enough for him .
in fact Abstract is a short summary or version prepared by cutting down a larger work .
this is the abstarct book of the company rules .
copies of abstract budget may be circulated to media .
an abstract class defines the basic skeleton for the class and it contains attributes and members .
no objects of an abstract class are created unless subclasses of the abstract class are defined with their own variations .
the Committee discussed the Abstract Contingent Bill and approved it .
one of the simplest abstract data types is the stack .
water abstraction regulation are to be followed by the companies .
abstraction of alcohol from local species is allowed here .
if abstraction level is higher it provides less detail and if it lower it provides more detail .
the contribution of abstract labour in a project is a factor to be considered .
the customer instructed the Bank to provide an abstract of his savings account .
the manager checked the abstract of teller &apos; s receipt to find out the discrepancies in the balance sheet .
the officer compiled the abstract of tender received .
the advocate will present the abstract of the document in court
the advocate will present the abstract of the receipts of the company in the court
while considering proposal for home loans abstract of title deed be evaluated carefully
a computer programmer would utilize the information hiding ability of an abstract operation , for example , to combine two functions that perform almost the same task into one function .
with the technique of abstract operation we can hide information .
the news abstractor was on leave yesterday .
the names in the absract sheet are missing .
abstract symbol requiring education to explain meaning .
the Abstract Syntax Tree is the base framework for many powerful tools of the Eclipse IDE .
abstract Syntax Notation One ( ASN . 1 ) provides a set of formal rules for describing the structure of objects that are independent of machine - specific encoding techniques .
abstract Window Toolkit facilitates the programmer to create such generalized GUI objects those are independent of a specific operating system &apos; s windowing system .
the employees &apos; demand for a raise in the salary on the basis of age and seniority rather than on qualification and grade is absurd .
what an argument !
the employees realized the absurdity of their demand for a salary hike on the basis of age and seniority .
depression sometimes causes abulia .
he was arrested on charges of abuse of power .
abuse of wealth leads to crime .
favouring relatives in allotment of plots by the Chairman is considered as abuse of powers .
abuse of process has become the source of income for some advocates .
diversion of funds to speculative trading is a clear abuse of trust
abusive use of this drug has been reported .
the employee was suspended for using abusive language against his boss .
Nepal abuts India on northern side
Abutilon indicum plant is often used as a medicinal plant .
the border of our city is abutting with a new city centre .
Srilanka and India have many abutting navigable channels .
acacia arabica is wild tree of India
acacia catechu is found on the Sahyadrii range .
the academic session begins in July and ends in May .
use of mobile phones is prohibited wherever academic activity is going on ( Classroom , Laboratories , Library ) .
most of the educational institutions also have academic advising services .
he is an Academic Advisor in several Business Schools .
a new academic advisory committee was formed last year .
academically , JNU is very favourable to the students to build up a career par excellence .
JNU is an academic and research institution which is mainly involved in research oriented postgraduate programmes .
a new academic body was formed last year .
the general meeting of the academic council will be held once in a year .
academic counseling is offered to slow learners .
the academic course is structured according to the syllabus that is prescribed by the CBSE .
he holds three academic degrees .
this academic department offers more than 130 courses .
the professor was engrossed in an academic discussion with students .
he has been awarded many academic distinctions .
he has been awarded many academic distinctions .
this B . ed . College is best for academic education
1 . JNU , New Delhi has academic faculties of highly qualified teachers . 2 . the study material has been developed by the academic faculty .
academic grading will be done on the basis of written test .
he is the greatest academician in the world .
this B . ed . College is best academic institution in the city .
JNU is an academic institution which is mainly involved in research oriented postgraduate programmes .
his activities are related to academic interests of the institution
officers are entitled for academic leave with salary if they avail it for higher education .
his academic life is very interesting .
academic life of Delhi University is very lively .
this is purely an academic matter .
the matter of appointment will be decided on academic matter
Mr . Saxena is on the post of academic officer since 2005 .
academic policy of the university will be decided again .
academic posts of the college will be filled by next month .
the minimum academic qualification for the post is graduation .
the appointment will be done strictly on the basis of academic qualifications .
academic record should be consistent to get a job .
the academic record of this student is outstanding .
you can see the academic regulations on university &apos; s webpage .
he has been very active in academics .
the academic sessions are generally devided in quarters .
the first quarter of this academic session would soon come to an end .
academic staff of the college will be on one day strike tomorrow .
academic Staff College of the University of Mysore was established on 10th July 1987 .
non - academic staff of the college will be on one day strike tomorrow .
no academic step can be taken regarding issue of bonus .
this webpage helps to understand the academic structure of JNU .
the functions of this academic wing is to support and advice the Directorate on all academic matters .
academic work should not suffer due to strike .
in academic world , School of International Study ( SIS ) of Jawaharlal Nehru University has an important place .
I was not very active in this academic year .
this academy is established to promote and train sports persons in the country .
the symptoms have developed into acalculia .
the Acalypha indica is found to have an antimicrobial action in a same spectrum as of neem
Indian medicinal plant Acanthus ilicifolius may combat liver cancer
causes of acpnia could not be ascertained .
the diversity of the Acari is extraordinary .
an acaricide is a product that will kill mites .
an acaricide is a product that will kill mites .
acarology is the scientific study of a particular sub family of arachnids
this drug killes acarus scabiei .
the acaudate is a breathlessly asthenic
he acceded to demands for his resignation .
the new provisions will accede in the by - laws with retrospective effect .
he acceded to the chairmanship of company .
they will not lightly accede to his request .
Rajasthan was the first acceding state for Polio eradication programme .
he joined as Deputy Director acceding to the post
he proposed new rules for the company after acceding to convention
looking to the short span of productive life of the machine decision of accelerated depreciation was taken .
accelerated Graphics Port is especially useful in conjuction with gaming , three - dimensional ( 3D ) video , and sophisticated scientific / engineering graphics programs .
accelerated learning is the most advanced teaching and learning method in use today .
usually Accelerated testing is applied to electronic equipment to help us in resolving design weaknesses in newly - developed equipment .
it is possible to accelerate the death by psychological means .
charging accelerating premium is not uncommon in case of constantly deteriorating quality of assets .
it revolution in the country brought an acceleration in the growth of the economy of India .
when a moving object hits the head remaining stationary , it is called acceleration injury .
Accleration clause in personal loans is a condition that can be invoked in time of need .
acceleration of estate will further increase after death of his brother .
acceleration of growth in infrastructure sector is important in acceleration of growth in economy
in fact the purpose of this study was to collect the normative data of acceleration time and to determine the errors .
acceleration is measured in meters per second squared ( m / s2 ) .
the accelerator board user need not bear any relation to a user account on the system .
in Windows programming , accelerator table provides you a list of accelerators
accent is strongly typed and has remote function calls .
accent has native support for strings and tables .
accent ARM can also manage the whole electronics supply chain including access to the major foundries for small - to - medium volumes silicon with a COT ( customer - owned tooling ) approach through its Highway to Silicon programme .
usually Accent arrangements are made to create a simple floral arrangement .
one example of Accent Aurhotity is Accent kernel , an operating system kernel .
the Taiwanese advisers are responding more to the need of Accent charge .
for using the codes of Accent class , our computer should have a separate numeric keypad on the right . if it does not , then another method of inputting accents is recommended .
ASAP ia an automotive service forAccent database management system .
accentuation at wrong places is a symptom of this disorder .
he accepted the offer of the job . .
to accept his arguments was impossible .
he accepted that he was in the room .
accept gives an error message and prompts again if command is not proper .
acceptability to inter - cast marriage is not so easy .
the solution proposed to curb pollution was not acceptable .
acceptable use is an important factor for an organization before getting into access to the information system of service provider .
the acceptable use policy bans the transmission of pornographic material on the Internet .
acceptable use policy documents are written for corporations , businesses , universities , schools , internet service providers , and website owners often to reduce the potential for legal action that may be taken by a user , and often with little prospect of enforcement .
the selected candidates are expected to send their acceptance of the job offer within a week .
bill was put up for acceptance for honour .
he gave his acceptance for participating in the event
an acceptance house guarantees the payment of bills used to finance trade deals and goods in shipment
the acceptance limit of different type of loans depends on the type of branch .
your acceptance must be absolute if you want to get this contract
you can get this contract if you give in writing for acceptance of bill .
you have to give in writing the acceptance the job .
on his acceptance of promise , he got this job work .
acceptance of your proposal will be given only after 4 days .
please send notification on acceptance of tender .
the contractor has deposited to Rs . 10 , 000 as security for acceptance of his tender .
obtain the acceptance of transfer debit from the account holder .
acceptance qualified tenders will be notified this week .
qualified acceptance is that which is given conditionally
the person agreed to pay as per the acceptances .
acceptance book should be maintained properly .
offer and Acceptance State are two basic processes for a business .
person accepting a bill for honour can record acceptance supra protest .
softwares , manufactured mechanical parts , or batches of chemical products are put under Acceptance test .
this document was accepted as authentic
his statement in the court was accepted as correct .
the primary role of Accepting houses were to accept and give guarantee the bills of exchange thereby facilitating the lending of money .
the accepting states are used to distinguish sequences of inputs given to the finite automaton .
accepting state test determines conformance of a product to design specifications .
the acceptor has to pay the bill of exchange as per agreement .
this drug acts as an acceptor .
the acceptor of the bill is liable on the bill .
the General ’ s wife was acceptor for honour for her husband ’ s bravery
he functions as acceptor of bill of exchange
the acceptor supra protest is required to give the same notice , in order to charge a party , which is necessary to be given by other holders
in Two user accounts , A and B . - Account B has invitation policy set to &quot; Always accept &quot; .
accept the confidence of your own activities .
the court accepted the plea of the accused .
the police gained access to the robbed house though a broken window .
you have to login first to access your e - mail account .
access provides you facility to create custom databases which store information in an organized structure .
special emphasis has been given for access and use of light in that building .
if there is one component in hard drives that can be considered its &quot; Achilles &apos; Heel &quot; ( A weak or vulnerable factor ) , it is the access arm .
in private and public computer networks ( including the Internet ) , the access authentication is commonly done through the use of logon passwords .
access Authority presents you many different hosting packages within the computer or a network .
in Access BPL signal uses the frequency band between 2 MHz and 80 MHz , and repeaters are located at intervals of 300 meters .
in Access broadband over power line signal uses the frequency band between 2 MHz and 80 MHz , and repeaters are located at intervals of 300 meters .
thieves gained access in the house by scaling or climbing over the wall .
you cannot access this software because of access control .
the monitor detects orphan frames by setting the monitor bit in the Access Control byte whenever it passes through .
an access control list ( ACL ) is a list of access control entries ( ACE ) .
access control matrix is the most general description of an operating system protection procedure .
the access grid contains multimedia large - format displays , presentation and interactive environments , and interfaces with Visualization environments .
accessibility to any defence institution is not very easy .
the cookie jar was easily accessible by the kids .
the unprotected area is always accessible for everyone .
as this is accessible place as such do not keep confidential documents
rules have been simplified for accessing of the records .
the accession of the king to the throne is celebrated with pomp and ceremony .
the accession of new members to NATO was discussed .
accession of books is done by librarians .
his accession as a Prime Minister of the state was a gala event .
the decision of accession is taken after a long brainstorming .
accession is always a happy affair .
an intense debate is necessary before accession .
after allotting a number the new books should be entered in the accession book / register .
Instruement of accession was a great document for Indian Government .
the accession rate of books in the last quarter of the year in our library is very high .
accession to office brings responsibilites .
in most web browsers , you can press Alt on PC system or Ctrl on Mac system simultaneously with the appropriate character on the key board as access to go to the specific part of a web page .
ISDN access line brings you higher speed connection than a normal modem dial - up .
generally an access log informs you the number of visitors , how many requests have been made for each page at the site etc .
the access matrix described for each user and object in the system a set of object - independent access rights .
a new test access mechanism ( TAM ) for multiple identical embedded cores is proposed .
access mode is used by programmers to read or write the access data set from creating or displaying terminal or other output device .
the access mode lets you specify the behavior of the particular feature based on the given details .
get access name table for a security object identified by name .
if you donot have access number of any person or online secvice then it is not possible to access for you .
carriers also provide accessorial service other than transportation of commodities .
tender was invited from the vendors to supply computer accessories .
accessories sometimes help to move towards goals .
Additional accessory is not required with this bus .
eleventh cranial nerve is called accessory nerve .
supernumerary nipple is called accessory nipple .
accessory is required for this process .
accessory cells are to assist the process neutritents .
accessory glands reduce pressure on main parts of body .
a shop owner must be able to produce an accessory licence on demand .
under a lease you have to pay the rent under accessory obligation .
accessory of a car affects the looks of the vehicle .
accessory products are to be purchased .
the right of property is not an accessory right .
any creature displys the accessory sexual character when it comes in briding mood .
helmet is an accessory to a two wheeler . .
accessory veins are nesessory to assist the flow of blud .
the Access Path is an optional piece of information that can be provided by the client .
provider - level access privileges define the actions you can perform on a application .
there are many access providers in India , one of them is MTNL .
when encrypted files are opened , an on - access scan is performed .
the access server &apos; s information or data can be accessed by the authorised persons or by the public through their systems . , if it is connected to internet .
beside a suitable access structure , an effective partitioning , representation , and storage of fuzzy data are also necessary for efficient retrieval .
access time consists of delay and transfer time .
accident can kill .
an accident can change your whole life .
he underwent a serious accident .
a cerebral arterial disorder caused cerebrovascular accident .
my meeting with my boss in the theatre was accidental .
accidentally the mask got off the face .
accidental Bleeding caused acute shortage of blood in the patient .
accidental expenditure during the year seems to be on high side .
fire Brigade is called for accidental fire .
accidentally he met him at the airport yesterday .
accidental omissions are common in naxalite areas .
this season the hotels made some accidental profit as the tourists were stranded due to strike . J970
accidental slip is a human nature .
accidental slip is a human nature .
the accident at sea sometimes becomes more dangerous .
it is not easy to control the accident of the sea .
keeping in view of number of accidents , this place has been declared as accidents prone area .
he has been appointed as an accidents investigation officer .
acclimatization is very essential for the soldiers before they are deployed .
acclimatization solves many complicacies .
his condition will improve after acclimatization .
the excess expenses are accommodated under suspense head .
the government agreed reach an accommodation with the separatists .
residential colleges provide hostel accommodation .
accomodation for students is not available here .
accomodation for staying will be provided to the new employees .
this place is reserved for public convenience
he was provided with the accommodation whie on tour to Goa
accomodation is availbale for employees .
Accomdoation facility is available for watchman in the school
the body makes accommodation to the new drug .
accommodation will be provided to the trainees in the bank .
accommodation bills are part of recognised practice in commercial circles .
accommodation Draft provides instruction to provide statutory registration and inspection by the Tourist Department .
accommodation on endorsement paves way for accommodation credit .
he sent an accommodation note to the bank for raising money on credit . account
while starting reading accommodation of eye takes a while .
accommodation paper in a legal document admissible in legal proceedings .
passengers are allowed to take 10 kg of accompanied baggage
this singer needs many accompanists on insrtument .
the accompanaying letter that comes with an offer letter is generally an acceptance letter .
he is an accomplised dancer .
his accomplished ways of addressing elders impressed the listeners .
this work has been accomplished by a group of professors in our university .
both the parties should accord to the terms and conditions laid down in the agreement .
an accord and satisfaction can be achieved with mutual consultation
we have to discover his plans and act accordingly .
this money belongs to the account of the Education Department .
an accountant maintains the accounts of an organization .
account may be posted according to date of receipt and payment of cash .
there should be an accountability of the authority .
an employee should be accountable to profit and loss of the company .
head of a department is the accountable person for smooth functioning of the department .
the accountant submitted the account abstract of income and expenditure to the manager .
a Chartered Accountant should be good in accountancy .
the accountant of our firm is an efficient worker .
the accounts of a firm is to be certified by a Charter Accountant .
the domestic banks have prepared a list of account bad debts .
the banks maintain account bad debts reserve to overcome the problems of recovery .
account balance has been shown in books .
account Banking facility is available in almost all banks .
the customers of the bank have to bring their account books for transaction in the bank .
in Share Market account brokerage is always done .
the stockholders of the company asked for the statement of the capital account .
a companies Cash Account balance should be more than its Accounts Payable Account balance to avoid possible bankruptcy .
account Circle should report in office .
steps are being taken to complete the process of account clearance .
account clerks maintain accounts of the organizations .
the customer should give an application to close an account .
account code should be used for easy transaction .
addition has not been done in account commission .
please correct all the mentioned errors in account ccnsignment .
please attach all the details of account contract .
please contact the account controlling department .
please check the comments of officers in the account cost documents .
the business organisation open current accounts for easy transaction .
last Friday of the month is observed as account day in the institution .
all entries are not valid in account deficiency
the bank was informed to send statements stating account deposit .
due to the fall of the dollar , there was account depreciation .
each paise of the amount should be accounted for .
all the source of income should be accounted for .
company accounts for the highest revenue generation for the India .
contractor has to account for all the material issued from stores for creation of tower .
each single item of stationary has to be accounted for at the time of taking balance .
he was ordered to account for endangered animals .
there are Rs . 20 , 000 in the account head for the celebration of the Independence day .
all revenue expenditure has to be booked under specific heads of expenditure already circulated .
statement of account is sent to the account holder on quarterly basis
income and expenditure account of the company shows
for further elaboration refer to accounting mannual
the fundamental need for finance accounting is the need to avoid the principal - agent problem by measuring and monitoring the agents ’ performance and reporting the results to the concerned parties .
accounting arrangement should be given a new look in the department .
now - a - days various Accounting softwares and solutions are available for Accounting finance system .
the IBM accounting machine , keypunch and sorter were the main ingredients of a punched - card data processing system up until the late 1960s .
accounting machine is in fact a combination of calculation and printing .
refresher course for one week on accounting method may be organised .
accounting objectives focus at finding out the profit the business has earned or loss incurred , and also to know the correct financial position on a particular date .
at big branches machines have been installed for accounting of cash .
the accounting period ended for cooperative banks as on 31st March
we need to define the accounting policies before we start the actual work .
accounting practice followed by different banks are more or less similar .
in fact Accounting prudence is a wise presentation of accounts which are Fiscally responsible .
accounting rate of return is commonly used internally while selecting projects .
accounting rules have been circulated to all concerned .
in fact Accounting is a service function that provides information of value to all operating units and to other service functions .
compliance of accounting standard may be ensured while finalising accounts .
we can say that there are 32 accounting standards in India .
organizations should develop a very sound accounting system to check in their income and expenditure .
accounting systems may be developed in - house by the company or organization or may be purchased from a third party .
every oranization has an accouning unit .
all the accounting work are handled by the accounting department .
accounting year for the unit will be from April to March
90 % of the savings bank account in this branch are accounts in operation .
normally husband and wife open joint account in the bank
account jurisdiction of the specialised branches are extended to entire district .
account keeping is done by an accountant .
for the correct access of achievements some product had to be left out of account
to update the mines account of this area is not a easy task .
the funds for entertainment etc . can be maintained using miscellaneous account .
electricity has multiple cost as the price differ in industrial and commercial
nominal account is maintained in every organization .
the account numbers are often defined as a &quot; string &quot; or &quot; alphanumeric field &quot; .
account of freight deposits has to be verified every week by the Accounts Manager .
account of interest demand should be made after accounts recovery .
account of issues is a special type of account .
review all the account opmte .
a large sum of money was paid on maintenance account .
on his account only the work could have been completed
our director &apos; s account is considered as a open account .
classified entries are entered in account operation .
there may be many operation account in one company .
account output cost is checked by cost officers .
the output cost is near to the final cost as it does not include profits
draft should be made account payee .
the cheque was written in favour of the payee
the cheque was written in favour of the payee
all payments over Rs . 5000 / - are to be made by account payee cheque only .
payee cheque is for a particular person may it be any
the banks need identification proof to open a personal account .
personal account is held by a particular individual
account petty cash is used for daily expenditures .
the petty cash was used when the ware house was on fire .
all transactions of this month have been posted in main ledger .
business of a bank depends on the number of private accounts they have .
private account is moreover meant for corporate people who have good amount of wealth
the profit and loss account is important for valuation of funds
Proifit and loss adjustment account is prepared in every organisatin .
from profit and loss appropriation account the firm found some unknown expenses
he filled the amounts given in account profroma .
proforma account is used with balance sheet and income statement
with progressive accounts we can achieve more valuable things .
property account shows the actual financial value of any establishment .
these documents were shown under public account
purchase bouchers are added in purchase account .
the purchase account of the company is ready for the year .
purchase ledger adjustment account must be maintained in every company .
the firm always maintains its income and expenditure in real account .
anything evaluated from realization account is taxable
the land on which the firm is established is in the real account of the company .
account receipts and payments of clubs are more popular .
receipt and payment accounts are maintained by trading concern .
deposit the daily incomes in regular accounts .
regular accounts are of many types .
10 % of the total in come should be deposited in reserve account .
Reserve account is a must for every firm to meet emergency expenditure .
things in residuary account are further distributed to deceased hirers
return account is the real evaluation of a person .
revenue account is prepared during the end of the year
maintain a rough account to keep an account of income and expenditure .
rough account is prepared to get the estimate of the future expenses
royalties suspense account is maintained in all publishing houses .
running account remains in usage constantly
salaries account has to be constantly updated
account sales guard book is used to keep a watch on different types of expenses .
sales guard book is prepared at the end with the balance sheet
please get a certificate for maintaining account books .
customers dealing with foreign currency can open a separate account .
separate account carry unusual transactions
a customer can open a single account or multiple accounts .
a single account is prepared for a new and unusual transaction .
a single cost account is prepared for a new and unusual transaction .
sinking fund investment account is very useful in some cases .
number of accounts of individuals maintained in this branch are 80 % of the total accounts
certain additional documents are required to be obtained for opening of accounts of partnership firm .
at the time of opening of account of receiver court order should be studied well .
Maintenances of accounts of states is different from professional firms .
accounts of union are regularly examined .
while maintaining accounts of works available budget amount may be kept in view .
sold ledger investment account is sometimes used for the benefit of the company .
organization of accounts is an important organisation .
Exracts of Accounts payable should be put up to head of the accounting unit daily .
the special goods accounted to be worth rs . 50000
consolidated information on accounts receivable may be put up to MD urgently .
accounts receivable financing is a recognised system of financing in bank .
accounts setting is a normal accounts procedure .
statement of accounts are given at the request of the customers .
the basic format of account structure is same .
account stated sheets for the year end may be preserved till final closure of the account .
account stated sheet has been placed before Audit Committee for information .
stock manager maintains stock account .
the stock account keeps the record of goods which are kept and not those which are under process
store account is maintained by the store manager .
the two managers hold subsidiary account individually
verification of accounts is essential to avoid errors in the accounts . .
the arrival of computer has made the account system efficient .
for the promotion number of his projects will be taken into account
the Government wrote off the account of freedom fighters and mergered the balance in it with the senior citizens .
the accoutrement for this banquet is not yet ready .
discovery of mohonjodoro is accredited to Mr . R . D . Banerjee .
her college was accredited by A grade .
a letter of accreditation was issued to him by his company .
Accredition is granted after following a set procedure .
schools may only become fully accredited once the Accreditation Council is assured that all accreditation criteria have been met .
this is an accredited university in the world .
trading in share market is safe through accredited brokers .
Accreditee can apply for sanction of special loan
accrescent antenna are essiencial in some insects .
sometimes accretion of interest on the principal amount is more than the principal amount .
accretion of foreign assets has to be reviewed on a regular interval .
accrual of income in investment is taken into account in the profits of current year .
accrual of interest may be taken into accounts at the end of the year .
the interest will be accured in your account .
the company had accrued deposits of over 10 million .
examples of accrued expense items might be interest that has accrued on an outstanding note that has not been paid , and taxes that have accrued but not yet been paid .
accured income gained through the term deposit is subject to tax deduction .
details of accrued income and expenditure may be furnished in annexure .
accrued interest on FDRs may be taken into account this financial year .
amount of accruing debt may be taken into accounts at the year end .
accumulated balance in the account can be used frutifully for the purpose .
accumulated losses are very high , internal auditors to please examine and report
Accumualated profit of the company will be given after three years to the share holders .
try to withdraw accumulated stock soon .
through Accumulating reproducer we can ensure that the complete card deck was read .
the accumulation of wealth may lead to income tax hazards .
accumulation of toxic chemicals in air leads to respiratory illness .
accumulation of capital is a prudent step for strengthening the firm
in the initial stage of a financial concern accumulation of funds is a wise decision
the canonical example for Accumulator shift instruction use is summing a list of numbers .
accuracy of the figure is essential in the statement of account .
the term accuracy control character is also used as a slang abbreviation in internet forums and chats .
other than computer science Accuracy control system is also used in medical science to dtermine a particular disease .
the accuracy of the statement may be verified before passing final order
please present a report on accuracy test .
accounts had all figures accurate .
this article accurately reflects public opinion .
in accounts you need to write the numbers accurately .
answers were written very accurately by few students .
the officer denied the accusation of corruption by him .
she made an accusation against the offcer asking for bribe from him .
he accused him of corruption .
the court accused him for corruption .
he accused him for defamation .
the accused officer hired a lawyer to defend him of the corruption charges .
he was not permitted to go abroad as he is an accused person in a murder case .
eyes gradually gets accustomed to darkness .
she is accustomed to take tea before going to bed .
some objects are acentric in function .
the Pilot ACE was shut down in May , 1955 , and was given to the Science Museum , where it remains today .
there is a fracture in acetabulum .
at the lower part of the acetabulum is the acetabular notch .
acetylcholine is one of many neurotransmitters in the autonomic nervous system
an achene is considered a dry fruit which does not bloom or release its seed
develop the skills needed to achieve your best in this exam .
the government has highlighted its achivements in five years .
in the end India managed to get its first achievement in the Beijing Olympics .
achievement - based education provides a powerful and robust framework for the curriculum .
the achievement level of the students was measured from the Matriculation mark - sheet .
this Achievement Test is one hour in length and consists of a series of multiple - choice questions .
sometimes both are absent , when the flower is achlamydeous , or naked , as in willow .
no apparent cause for achlorhydria was found .
this posture causes ach low back .
this is a typical case of achondroplasia .
his skin is achromatic .
the chromosomes separated within the achromatic spindle
it is more or less protoplasmic , and consists of a clear fluid that is achromatin
interestingly , acicular acanthite is known to grow on native silver specimens .
base neutralises acid .
stale food becomes acidic in the stomach .
the powder is to be dissolved in an acid base .
acid - base balance is to be maintained .
acid base balance has been disrupted .
Mycobacerium tuberculosis is the classic example of acid - fast baceria .
mycobacerium tuberculosis is a type of acid - fast bacillus .
Acidification is arrested after taking this liquid .
acidity of the solution increased .
symptoms of acidosis are seen .
acid test ratio is showing favourable trend .
this affects acinus in the lungs .
the government offices acknowledge the receipt of applications .
the ministry of sports refuses to acknowledge the need for more grants for hockey .
the Acknowledge character ( ACK ) function is heavily used in the Automatic repeat - request ( ARQ ) function .
an acknowledge character may also be used as an accuracy control character .
an acknowledgement receipt is sent to the sender .
acknowledgement of the application was notified .
the courier delivered the parcel and demanded acknowledgement .
received frames or packets are idetified in Acknowledgement frame .
his signing on the paper doesn &apos; t clearly prove his acknowledgement of his complicity .
until a person is in acknowledgement of debt , the bank can &apos; t drag him to a court .
as a new employee one has to go through Policy Acknowledgement checklist .
don &apos; t forget to take the tear - off acknowledgement receipt attached to the form .
the lawyer showed the acknowledgement coupon of the money order to prove that the money had been realised .
acknowledge operation is intended to inform that notification of data is received properly .
an ACL specifies which users or system processes are granted access to objects , as well as what operations are allowed on given objects .
the Association for Computing Machinery , or ACM was founded in 1947 as the world &apos; s first scientific and educational computing society . its headquarters are in New York City .
acne vulgaris is common during adolescence .
Acoelomate is an animal that lacks a body cavity or a coleom .
acoustic trauma occurs due to injury to hearing by loud noise .
acoustical sound enclosure consists an echoic chambers , acoustical material , sound curtains , sound proofing , acoustical foams etc .
the acoustic coupler is a hardware device that allows a computer to connect to other computers .
acoustic Delay Line memory was a form of computer memory used on some of the earliest digital computers , such as the EDSAC and UNIVAC .
the acoustic waves are introduced into the plate from the tip of the stylus and are detected by a plurality of detectors positioned at various points along the periphery of the plate .
these experts encode any sound information to acoustic memory .
an acoustic modem is used to transmit data underwater , much as telephone modems are used to transmit data over phone lines .
the acoustic presentation of the next plan of the company was appealing .
one example of acoustic signal processing for biomedical purposes is its use in restoring hearing .
when the user turns on a storage switch 1805 and a target sound to be stored makes a sound , an acoustic storage process starts and detects a rising edge of the entered acoustic signal .
I was not acquainted with the facts of the case .
Mr . Singh made me acquainted with the latest operating system of the machinery .
this professor is of my acquaintance .
I had littile acquaintance with computer programming .
due to chemical contamination of water bodies , acquatic animals are fighting for their survival
I am fully acquainted with the norms of tourist visa .
he is well acquainted with her family .
this suicide note is written by someone else , because I am acquainted with her handwriting .
the witness was not acquaintd with the facts of the case .
the developing countries have to acquiesce in what the US decided about Afganistan .
Rita always acuqiesces in to all the demands of her husband .
Rita is in always acuqiesces regarding to all the demands of her husband .
acquisition of assets is not an easy task .
the small chunks of the land were acquired by the big builder .
the loss incurred due to heavy interest rates .
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ( AIDS )
because of acquired advantage B company is in better competitive position .
this is acquired resistance to some diseases .
the government hesitated to implement all its laws on the acquired territories
Indian IT firms earn around $ 10000 per year in foreign exchange .
firm has acquired interest in making payment in the instruments which were protested earlier
the government is the single largest acquirer of farm lands in the southern states .
Simla bank stands better chances to run as acquiring bank for Kalka bank
Vodafone is the acquiring company in the recent bid held for Hutch .
Vodafone is the acquiring company in the recent bid held for Hutch .
in case to claim this type of insurance acquiring insurer will have to appear before court
he is the biggest property acquirer in the county
in land acquisition there are many problems .
agriculture land acquisition is a serious problem .
the laws regarding the acquisition and termination of citizenship in India are very tough .
company laws in India are not so clear regarding the rules of acquisition and transfer of right , title and interest during a take over .
acquisition of assets of the defaulters can be undertaken
Mr . Sood is the land acquisition officer on behalf of the government for this big deal .
acquisition of land from farmers by government has never been free of controversies
the laws governing acquisition of patent rights or copyrights in India need a lot of amendments .
the big pharma companies got the right for acquisition of stowing of newly invented medicine .
he was never engaged in acquisition of property during his whole service .
the acquisition period can be divisible .
Acquital from court is a big relief .
they are heard to acquit charges against the guilty tourist .
the tourist was forced to acquit of charges .
it was for this reason that the person was obliged to acquit of charges .
the judge voted to acquit on the criminals charges .
due to acquittal his service was again restored .
after all debt payment he took a shy of relief .
he showed the copy of the agreement as an acquittance of his debts .
acquittance Roll of all money distribution should be sent .
few acre of property was gifted to him by his ancestors .
acres of land was kept uncultivated by him .
the acre wild was seen to be completely destroyed by forest fire .
its taste ils acrid .
Acrobat makes PDF files available for you to view either directly with the reader or you can view them as embedded files within the browser .
news about acrobatic show had come on today &apos; s news paper .
acrobats risks their life to perform the show .
the reversed acrocentric is lethal unless the missing heterochromatin is present .
there is no doubt that this boy is a case of acromegaly .
rudimentary segments are &apos; &apos; hidden &apos; &apos; in the acron
basic is the acronym for &quot; Beginners All purpose Symbolic Instruction Code &quot; .
Acroparesthesia is reported in some patients .
it takes 15 minutes to swim across this river .
villagers had to travel across the sea to go to the clinic .
his house was located across from the school .
this road leads across the face of the twin towers .
there is improvement in the each department &apos; s execution across the board .
5 % across the board rise has been approved by the committee of governors
across the counter act in efficient manner is important for image building .
there are two ovaries , the egg tube is acrotropic .
acrylic is useful for application designers it factilitates them to use effects in both vector and bitmap types of graphics graphics such as fringes and drop shadows .
expert work earns praise .
some changes have been made in banking ल@@ ोकप@@ ाल act .
he is known for his charitable acts .
all the characters acted their respective roles nicely in the Oscar winning movie .
it is important that we act immediately to stop such corruption .
the act does not permit smoking here .
she acts like a fool to make you feel good .
he is the final authority as he acts as the principal for the management .
the officers can only act by the notice in writing by the court
they failed to bring any positive results as they were acting from cowardice while the situation wanted some bold moves
the officer was expelled from service for his repeated acts of negligence
the minister swiftly acted upon the advice of the expert committee .
the management soon discovered that Robert &apos; s moves were fitted to deceive them
actin is associated with initiation of cell wall formation
the authorities are acting in accordance with the directives given to them by the court in this case .
the treaty doesn &apos; t really act in aid of peace between the two states .
Mr . Peter is acting in this seminar as a representative character for his group .
going abroad without intimation while facing trial in a court is an act in disobedience to the orders .
acting Director has temporarily been given this post .
in the absence of Mr . Branson , Mark was the acting decision maker of the firm .
there was no depth in the actor &apos; s acting skills
acting allowance more than 15 days is acceptable .
because of the acting appointment of the manager , no important decisions were taken .
in the absence of any clear - cut regulatory policy , many financial institutions are acting as a banker
David didn &apos; t have enough powers to run the company as he was just an acting chairman
appointing an acting chief justice will not provide a long term solution
the officer was suspended as he was found to be acting in breach of regulations
to defeat terrorism , different security agencies will have to act in combination
the group couldn &apos; t achieve much success as they failed to act in concert
they were successful in acting in execution of the idea of selling the product .
acting in good faith always earns goodwill .
during emergency situations , the governor of a state acts in a legislative capacity
an acting judge can &apos; t pass important rulings
I took the money in good faith without counting .
after completing his studies , he thought of getting an acting partner for his business
when the Principal of the school retired , Mr David was appointed the acting principal as he was the senior most in the institute .
acting service will be considered for salary hike .
we raised fund in behalf of flood - effected people .
actinic protein occurs in globular and fibrous forms .
actinic burns are caused by ultraviolet or sun rays .
State bureaucracy in India acts in law of the centre .
he had acted in obedience to the law
he appeared before the court in obedience to the summons served on him .
Actinomorphic flowers are plate , cup or bell shaped like Water Lilies
she may need some money for bail in pursuance of legal actions .
he failed to act in the execution of his duties .
visiting the headquarters every week is just like acting in the ordinary course of business
please apprise me of the appropriate action .
team work leads to better result .
this depends on the action of the drug .
drug starts its action at once .
volcanic activity is the action of natural forces .
Government took some sever action against him .
book - debt is an actionable claim which is recognised by law .
an action committee has been formed to decide the future course of action for the agitation .
an example of Action cycle is that Humans form goals and then develop a series of steps required to achieve that goal , using the computer system .
1 . most action learning programs take from four to nine months to complete . 2 . action learning is one of the most powerful performance - improvement strategies .
if two forces of equal magnitude act upon a rigid body along the same line of action but in opposite directions , the result would be zero .
action message format is used primarily to exchange data between an Adobe Flash application and a remote service , usually over the internet .
a time bound action plan to achieve the targets has been circulated .
most parser generators allow the programmer to specify action routines .
certain actions were brought against them .
to activate this software you need to have an environment file .
he was trying to activate his software .
activated charcoal
the activated carbon would absorb all the toxicity .
this contains activated charcoal , which absorbs all the toxic substances in the intestines .
activated carbon , also called activated charcoal or activated coal .
the substance helps in the activation only .
this activation function gives output that is either 0 or 1 .
the activation record typically contains the return address , the parameters and the local variables .
this does not take part in the reaction , but acts as an activator .
tissue plasminogen activator is a potent activator
please issue certificate to these people for their active contribution .
the substance becomes active only after being injected into the blood .
the Active Area of an analog TV signal is the portion visible on the screen .
for withdrawal of amount under active balance of payment , no restrictions are generally imposed .
active bonds are in demand in capital market .
active capital forms substantial part of invested funds .
in an Excel worksheet , the data can only be entered into the active cell .
figures of active circulation of notes are published by Reserve Bank of India .
all of the high - level elements in the configuration file contain an optional configuration attribute .
an ActiveX control can be automatically downloaded and executed by a Web browser .
an intelligent or active database system is able to provide support to engineering applications , which require both data and rules to be managed .
an Active Database Management System ( ADBMS ) is a standard &apos; passive &apos; DBMS that has the capability to react to events of a prespecified nature .
some automated tools used in the prototype development process may also provide an active data dictionary capability .
in Active DBMS event handling is often rule - based , as with an expert system .
80 % of the deposits of the bank form part of active deposits .
active Directory server makes the network management a routine for your data , security , and distributed resources , and enables interoperation with other directories .
active end improves conventional fire alarm system and thus more reliable .
the active file is located in Temporary Folder of the system , and lists all groups known at your site and the articles currently online .
there are three main types of hubs : passive hub , Active hub and Intelligent hub , which provide the type of functionality you need in building network .
active index is very popular in mutual fund market .
in the medical model , the prescription is the active ingredient
in active learning , the model defines the effect one set of observations , called inputs , has on another set of observations , called outputs .
a class discussion , learning cell , short written exercise are some examples of active learning activities .
we can get ActiveLight at SourceForge . net with free downloads from the largest Open Source applications and software directory .
how do I add an active link into a paragraph or blog ?
most of the loans of the bank come under active loans category
it was heard that she participated actively in the competition .
Bombay stock exchange is a active share market
an active master file has at least one treatment with a specified duration that extends beyond the current date .
when an active master item is expired , an authorized user accesses the Master Item Detail screen , changes the Use To Date to the date the item should be expired , and saves the item .
active matrix displays provide a more responsive image at a wider range of viewing angle than dual scan displays .
active money plays an important role in the economy of the country .
active name table consists many things like active network abstraction , active network architecture , active network diagram , active network service etc .
active node provide full flexibility to the user to manage and provide active services .
active object is widely used in Symbian C + + to take care of running multitask in the same thread .
active partner can draw his salary from the firm .
70 % of the population of the country is active population .
active port refers to the currently enabled port ( i . e . the port on which the traffic is passed ) .
active port downloads are available at CNET Download . com .
you can see how the active process table can quickly fill up , especially if your mail server is getting bombed with thousands of bogus email spam messages .
active process table is set up when the process is created and is deleted when the process terminates .
active reference table helps a user while creating or searching some missed information .
active resistance is a resistance reaction of the host plant in response .
this supplemental information covers active satellite launch dates and other info .
active segment table may be used while generating a buffer .
websites on Active Sensing are related to product lifecycle management ( PLM ) solutions .
my website is created in Active Server Pages .
information about Protein active site
most of the co - operative societies in rural areas are not working as active societies .
there is specified method for electing an active station in a data - processing system .
shares of Tata Tea are an active stock .
active storage have been quite useful for Large - Scale Data Mining and Multimedia .
active termination is currently the most common type of termination being used .
active trade balance is showing increasing trend of late .
I am getting an error &quot; No Active Transaction in Progress &quot; .
active value plays an important role in day to day share market .
till date no active volcanoes had been seen .
enable / Disable Active Window Tracking to Mouse Movements .
a diligent activist provides good leadership .
today &apos; s youth raised their voice along with activist group .
various activities were conducted in the school .
organisation &apos; s activity is under the jurisdiction of surveilance .
blocking activity is a phenomenon of repression of electrical activity in the brain .
he had to undergo vigorous physical activity .
now Activity Based Learning concept is applied in Tamilnadu , Rajasthan , Chhattisgarh and Other few states of India .
because of Activity loading some of our web pages are taking a long time to load .
the activity ratio has been poor in the new project .
this activity step is totally safe , stimulating and should be an integral part of every child &apos; s first years .
they are acting judicially to take part in the bid .
this pattern of documentation in such cases is an act of a routine nature .
it seems that the deal was broken due to act of bad faith .
Act of commission and omission are not offences
Act of Commission or Omission is an ideal sentence in business .
change of land laws can take place with the act of dominion legislature .
being the senior most staff , he looks after most acts of the firm
Act of god is always unimaginable .
Insurance is not provided in the cases of loss inccurred due to act of god
sentence to death can be commuted to life imprisonment as an act of grace by the Supreme Court .
leaving the court room without permission is an act of indecency .
liquidating the assets of the company in a hurried manner in the face of heavy losses was an act of insolvancy .
noncompliance of the orders would be considered as act of insubordination .
I consider it an act of law on my part to pay my taxes on time .
some of the acts of the legislation in India are entirely out of the purview of the courts
he was convicted under the act of misconduct .
this is not in the category of omission or commission
I am not well aware of the act of ommission and commission .
President &apos; s approval is mandatory for the act of parliament .
the Royal assent is a must before Act of Parliament of the UK is passed as a law .
the court was of the view that the acts of the concerned parties were not above board
the politician was of the view that the smearing campaign against him was an act of his public enemies
there was a board outside the private park that read , &quot; Any act of trespassing will be dealt with strictly
Gandhi opposed all acts of violence non - violently .
even purchasing of extra arms was considered an act of war by the neighbouring country
Act on the instruction that is being given by the teacher .
he was asked to act on the matter .
during a war the national press acts on behalf of the nation .
in a free market companies are expected to act in accordance of the principals of business
he behaves like a born actor .
the masses got influenced by the acts of abstinence by the religious guru .
she was told to act out as per given file .
all acts purporting to be done will be overseen by the chairman himself
in this country , any act to express dissent is dealt with firmly
to stop future terrorist attacks , all the security agencies will have to act together
the new law passed by the Parliament will certainly have a retrospective effect on the cases related to real estate .
during the war some communist parties owing allegiance to the USSR acted traitorously .
actual company was located in the other area .
what is the actual address of your document linked on this web page ?
please send the attested original receipt .
actual cash value of electronic installation may not be much .
debugging some code in Visual Studio 2008 ( C + + ) , one may notice that the address in the function pointer variable is not the actual address or code of the function itself .
in the case of file transfer , the Actual data transfer rate corresponds to the achieved file transfer rate .
the period insertion symbol is counted in the size of the item , and represents the position within the item where the actual decimal point is inserted .
estimated value of actual estate items may be worked out .
actual working laws in the factory should not be more than 8 hour .
travel agency actualize dreams of its passengers .
I want the actual key to decrypt the message .
actually he was a part of that group .
please release the actuals after analysis .
there is huge shortfall in actuals and target under foreign business .
the actual strength of this branch is less than the sanctioned strength .
what is the actual time required for completing the installation process ?
actual total loss is more than the expected loss .
please again fill actual travelling expenses .
actual users are much more in number .
when you enter actual work time on a weekly basis by using the Hours Per Time Period method in a Microsoft Project Web Access timesheet , the actual work may be applied to nonworking days .
please present an anaysis on actuarial responsibility .
actuarial liability is subject to certain conditions as mutually agreed .
actuarial valuation seems to be more .
appointment of actuary is under consideration .
he went to actuate the Washing machine .
the motor and mechanism that moves the head assembly on a disk drive or an arm of a robot is called an actuator .
once the court declared him a criminal , the police began acting under a warrant of arrest
the police is acting in the case under the colour of its process .
the orders of the manager restricts us to act under his warrant .
the officer is simply working under the authority of his officer , without having any individual say in the process
the officer acted undutifully and was punished for that .
it was seen that he acted up before noon .
Government planned to extend the act up to 2012 .
the inquiry officer couldn &apos; t do much as he had to act within the scope of his stipulated official powers
acuity of vision has been lost .
acuity of vision is to determined .
she has a very good acumen in business matter .
the focus of this experiment was to examine Musa acuminate .
acupuncture procedure claims to relieve this type of pain .
this is acute respiratory failure .
a triangle in which all three angles are acute angles .
there was an acute storage of water .
she is an acute observer .
the objective of conducting an acute dermal toxicity study is the same .
following a single sublethal acute dosage of aldicarb .
acute inhalation toxicity is the total of adverse effects caused by a substance .
she acutely changed her insight .
the more traditional test for acute oral toxicity is the oral LD 50
examples of acute poisonings are massive drug overdoses .
villagers are facing acute storage of water .
in chemistry alkanes are the example of acyclic compounds .
we can call acyclic digraph as a directed acyclic graph or a &quot; DAG &quot; .
conquest began in 200 ad .
he conquered many areas in ad 1632 .
the ada bazzar of Indore is full of jewellery and cosmetics .
she was called as adagio in the class .
basically ADA language was designed for embedded applications and process control but is also used for logistics applications .
Adam was husband of Eve .
she adamantly opposed to the proposal .
the external rings of the adanal disc .
a small copulatory papilla at posterior margin of the sclerotized ring and a short tube .
the copulatory or genital papillae are called supplements .
adapt according to the given measures .
a common unifying theme of this volume is studying the adaptability of human .
this procedure seems favourable hence can be accepted .
please organise a talk on proper adaptation of the system .
eyes have the ability of adaptation in the dark .
adaptation to environmental issues is not a new concept .
adapter is fitted with the teeth .
plug to the power supply through an adapter .
adapter address is also called a Physical Address , Hardware Address , Ethernet ID or MAC on various systems .
if you want to enhance video game performance on your computer , you could purchase a faster display adapter , plug it into the AGP or PCI slot and disable the built - in display cards .
adapter device is used in communications .
adapter device driver architecture is also useful for USB , Audio , SCSI and network adapters .
rotor adapter includes an inboard and an outboard adapter segment .
locals should adapt for tourism &apos; s future needs .
Multiscale phenomena are hard to capture by adaption
adaptive behavior ( ecology ) refers to adjust with Nature and existing circumstances for humans , animals and plants .
adaptive employees works in his company .
adaptive Branching can measure reading progress and prepares students for the year end tests .
this is an adaptive channel allocation for large - scale streaming content delivery systems .
adaptive communications techniques involve the design of advanced digital systems for application - specific embedded systems and advanced algorithms for improving network efficiency .
adaptive differential pulse - code modulation denotes the value of the sampled sound modulation in binary terms .
an adaptive hypermedia system tracks your browsing behavior and can change the link to a different Web page or document that is more tailored to the user .
hypertext is the base of the World Wide Web , which provides you facility to click on a link to obtain more information on a consequent page on the same site or from a Web site anywhere in the world .
adaptive Integration evaluates the function more frequently if there is no complication .
adaptive Maintenance is also known as Software maintenance .
adaptive optimization takes benefit of local data conditions to optimize away branches and to use inline expansion to decrease context switching .
adaptive Sampling aims to generate a representative random subset of the actual files using a suitable hash function .
adaptive sampling is also a new sampling design in which sampling regions , defined as &quot; units &quot; , are selected based on values of the variables .
adaptive spatial subdivision used to simplify the input mesh .
ther are many product , device , or equipment in adaptive technology which include large - key keyboards , alternative input devices , like touch screen displays , speech recognition programs , text reader etc . .
tourists should be ready to adopt to new conditions .
ADCON is an expression which is used in the calculation of storage addresses for computers .
ADCPM ( Adaptive differential pulse - code modulation ) is used for eliminating errors in transmission of long - distance telephone lines and outer - space communications .
shall I add your name to the list ?
teacher told her to add more pages in her book .
add some extra glasses to the dinner table .
you can add / drop courses from second week of January to third week of January .
trees added attractions in the surrounding area .
justification for added entry has to be furnished .
field 440 contains a series title statement when the series statement and the controlled added entry form of the series title are the same .
sweets in new pack are being marketed on added value .
in simple words we can say that addend is a number or quantity to be added to another .
please araange addenda payment .
please send the book after adding addendum .
addendum was done to certain documents .
in modern computers adders reside in the arithmetic logic unit .
the Adder Subtracter provides a Carry Output and an Overflow output to indicate the status of the current arithmetic operation .
select a list of files you want to convert into &quot; Add file &quot; and drop them on the magic hat icon .
he has become addict of drugs .
it was seen that addict does not have control over their mind .
many drugs addict were seen near the beach area .
addicted to noise was Founded by ex - Rolling Stone editorwriter Michael Goldberg ,
addiction of alcohol has affected his liver .
he had an addiction for fast riding .
that game is very addictive to play .
that tourist was becoming an addict to alcohol .
he was asked to keep a check on money before adding the invoice .
use of adding machine is very simple .
adding machine provides a printed record on paper tape with or without a digital display .
once after you install the add - in program , you will notice a new button of “ New SMS Message ” appeared in your Outlook window .
please add the suggestions in mentioned para .
addtion is very common and basic aspect of mathematics .
she was a new addition to the staff .
Additional allownaces amount will be given from next month onwards .
creation of new post of additional magistrate can be thought of .
Additional information about the place was given by the guide .
Additional assessment of tax is possible under certain specific circumstances
good response from clients has been received for the additional banking facilities started at the centre
please give additional charge to the special officer .
please make arrangement for return of additional collection .
a petition has been filed against additional countervailing duty .
the proposal for additional excise duties in lieu of sales is welcomed by everyone .
please send propsal of additional funds for the new project .
please fullfil all the formalities for additional grant .
please send additional information for quick disposal of the cases .
Additional information related with this case has been made available .
please send another copy of additional invoice .
he serves additionally as manager of that tourist company .
for completing the project before time the director sanctioned additional pay for the employees .
Additional requirements for post has been mentioned in the letter .
from this year additional surcharge of 2 % will be levied .
please decide the target for additional tax recovery .
please send all the additions in the meeting after alteration .
we can specify the addition of a new attribute type , blogURL , in an LDIF file .
specific chromosomal regions can be targeted by using deletion or addition line material .
addition record is commonly used in database .
vast additions of pages were made to the tourist book .
additions and alterations in the speech of MD may be carried out carefully .
please make additions and alterations in the proposal .
after carrying out additions and betterments as suggested by the MD text may be mailed for his perusal .
additions and deletions as suggested have been carried out .
apart from salary emoluments are attractive .
the Addition Table help children learn to Add .
well , not quite , but it uses water as a fuel additive
good horizontal resistance is achieved by combining three or four of these additive resistance genes .
food additives were used in many restuarants .
many tourist called that guide as addle brained .
the LDAP add operation can be used to create an entry in the Directory Server .
please distribute copy of chief guest &apos; s speech after his speech .
complete address of the applicant is mandatory .
the C - DAC &apos; s address on internet is www . CDAC . in .
he listened to the address very carefully .
his address was wrongly printed on the form .
the guide was asked to address himself to the particular task .
screen pixels and RAM memory are addressable .
your computer &apos; s RAM memory is addressable therein each of bytes can be read and written independently of the others .
a box of enclosure is a parallelepiped that can be centered about any addressable point and assigned arbitrary dimensions .
gmail provides an unlimited storage address book to the users .
a computer with a 32 - bit address bus can directly address 4GB of physical memory , while one with 36 bits can address 64GB .
sort the sequence with an address calculation sort .
the effective address computation uses three fields of the instruction word : the 18 - bit address field , the index field , and the indirect bit .
the name of the addressee is written on the front side of an envelope .
the addressee of this letter is not mentioned .
change the default address field search for firefox Tutorials .
each class allocates one portion of the 32 - bit Internet address format to a network address .
the IP Address Generator will show you your IP address .
this is an overview of W3C materials related to Addressing .
in computer programming , addressing modes are primarily of interest to compiler writers and to those who write code directly in assembly language .
addressing virtual memory makes programs capable to run when not all of their program code or data is currently in physical memory and also makes them able to run from almost any location in physical memory .
type your house number in adress line 2 .
IP Address mapping Database can help you identify visitor &apos; s geographical location ie . country , region , city and ISP .
the effective address computation uses three fields of the instruction word : the 18 - bit address field , the index field , and the indirect bit .
please make a draft for address of welcome .
purchase of addressograph will be helpful .
the memory address register ( MAR ) holds the address of the memory location where the next instruction is to be executed .
in a TCP / IP network , there are two address resolutions . the first is the conversion from a domain and host name into an IP address . the second is from the IP address to the Ethernet address .
address Resolution Protocol has been implemented in many types of networks ; it is not an IP - only or Ethernet - only protocol .
when a person creates any e - mail ID he has to insert @ address sign between his user name and the domain name , which is a standard form for e - mail ID .
an address space depends upon the width of the processor &apos; s address bus and address registers .
address space is the amount of memory allocated for all possible addresses for a computational entity , such as a device , a file , a server , or a networked computer .
address table contains the entities for multiple addresses those have alternate addresses .
he gave address to the courier service .
network Address Translation allows private network addresses to be managed separately from public Internet addresses .
Assemblers and compilers works as address translator which translate symbolic addresses into machine addresses .
adds , moves and changes are implemented to local area networks in reference to clients , servers , routers , switches , etc . and also to telephone networks , such as phones , PBXs , etc .
the service adds to the package which is being offered to the new customers .
add to this some other range of jewellery .
some more of these will add to his worries .
several factors have been adduced to explain the fall of birth rate .
he tried to adduce illustration in support of his argument .
he was asked to adduct the thigh muscle .
adduction sometimes corrects this problem .
the anterior adductor muscle is in front of the mouth
these evidence add up right .
also add up other bills to the file .
some aspects of his script didn &apos; t add upto
select a list of files you want to convert into &quot; Add file &quot; and drop them on the magic hat icon .
when mandibles are present in an adecticous pupa , they never have a basal
he is suffering due to adenitis .
an adenoma has formed near the abdomen .
he adeptly provided much knowledge to the tour group .
adequacy of resources will be in our favour .
he questioned the adequacy of the presentation made by him .
adequacy criteria have long been a focus of research .
adequacy of data help in formulating a perfect scheme .
the syllabus of the course is adequate .
adequate ventilation was made in the roof area of the kitchen .
adequate consideration would inspire people for providing better services .
matter was given adequate consideration but could not be approved .
he was adequately prepared for the tour .
most of the urban areas are covered under adequately bank facilities
the adhai concept is not seen used in english language .
bus driver was asked to adhere to the speed limit .
the people who visiti this place need to closely adhere to the rules of the temple .
Srtict adherence of public rules should be practiced by every citizen .
these bacteria are adherent to red blood cells in presence of some suitable receptors .
the people of this area were believed to have killed the adherents of the prophet .
the area is such that mud adheres to the shoes .
employees should srictly adhere to the given company rules .
for ten months he adhered to his no profit no loss principle in the business .
the people of this area strictly adhere to the values of hinduism .
the tourists are strictly asked to adhere to the given set of rules .
the adhesive plaster will join the bone soon .
fix this adhesive plaster on the wound .
adhesive stamp will be used in registration office .
adhesive tape is produced in the country only .
adhesive tape is very cheap in the market .
the ancient temple is of the godess who is the adhisthatri diety of that place . .
adhoc appointments are regularised .
please form a committee on ad hoc basis .
please tell us the expected price after adhoc adjustment .
adhoc benefit is not available regularly .
please release the names of ad hoc committee members .
please issue goods against ad hoc indent .
please get stationary after giving adhoc indent .
ad hoc networks are normally closed , therein networks do not connect to the Internet and are created between interested or required participants .
notification for the formation of adhoc tribunal should be issued .
these are symptoms of adiadachokinesis .
the tourist guide says that adi dhakeswari vastralaya is one of the best toy store .
translation work of the adi granth is being carried out by the scholar .
there is a international institute in adilabad .
Adinarayan bhojanalaya is very much famous in the city of belgaum .
he is the adinath according to the mythological book .
nomination of director is for ad infinitum .
Mr . x will be director ad infinitum .
Secretary can be nominated on ad interim basis .
the travel agency took ad interim measures .
a fat cell or adipocyte stores calories in the form of lipids .
his food habit has made him adipose .
adiposis increases risk of cardiac failure .
persons having adiposis are more susceptible to this disease .
I need the schedule of busses going to adipur .
Adi shankaracharya was a most holy person and a great philospoher of the hindu religion .
in fact an adjacency list is the representation of all edges or arcs in a graph as a list .
the lowest - order adjacency effect in channel 1 is about 7 per cent and in channel 2 is about 5 per cent and the NDVI changes by about 0 · 5 per cent .
routers in the same broadcast domain or at each end of a point - to - point telecommunications link form adjacencies when they have detected each other .
to construct the adjacency matrix for a Simple Graph , one can label all the vertices in order .
adjacency node information can be displayed for a specific MAC address .
in fact in computer science , an adjacency list is a data structure for representing graphs .
with the passage of time Achromatic colour contrast as a function of adjacent subareas was investigated .
please consult adjacent office .
our information office is adjacent to the post office .
total expenditure is close to the target .
the two adjacent seats at the back of the bus were totally wet due to rain .
for adjacent domains , create Adjacent Domain documents .
the term Adjectivally tourism has emerged greatly over the years .
here is the list of descriptive adjectives of various images of tourism .
the room adjoined to my room is very small .
the land and the water body are seen to adjoin closely .
this is the point where the two land adjoin .
the tourist wanted a seat adjoining the seat of his wife .
to calculate adjoint of matrix , just put the elements in rows to columns in the cofactor matrix .
the court proceedings were adjourned for one week .
work had to be postponed due to electricity failure .
he is the prime person involved and he only can adjourn the meeting .
the meeting got adjourn to someother place in the city .
try to get adjournment in this case .
adjournment motion on the accident was proposed in Lok Sabha .
to adjudge the case under the jurisdiction of local judge .
he has the right to adjudge the winner .
the default payment was adjudged to him .
adjudged bankrupt is debarred from availing number of banking facilities .
hearing of case is complete , only sentence has to be announced .
he was asked to adjudicate at the competition .
please apply for the fast adjudication .
all the mutually agreed cases may be sent for adjudication of claims .
the adjudication of notes is done by competent officers of Reserve Bank .
please get two copies of adjudication order .
adjudicator has not his responsibility so far .
adjudicator has been transferred .
for several years he is an adjunct faculty at the Department of Humanities &amp; Social Sciences .
for several years he is an adjunct professor at the Department of Humanities &amp; Social Sciences .
the students &apos; attitude towards the adjunct program is more complicated .
I adjure you to please tell me the truth .
please adjust the expenditure as per the hiked expenditure .
Photoshop plug - in Topaz Adjust makes photos stunning by using creative exposure , powerful detail enhancement , and unique color manipulation .
the visitors were asked to adjust to the cold conditions of the region .
the clothes were properly adjusted in the cupboard .
the technician was asked to adjust the instrument properly .
expenditure bill / voucher in respect of adjustable advance may be submitted within one month .
Hong Konng dollar is an adjustable currency .
the large adjustable extent is from 100 : 1 to 200 : 1 , the CV curve of discharge characteristic is similar to the percentage curve .
please send the adjusted profit projection soon .
adjusted price mechanism help both seller and the buyer .
please present all the information before adjuster .
adjuster please take immediate action soon .
registration of adjusting account has been done .
adjusting account register has not be posted upto date .
adjusting entry has been passed .
please adjust journal entry .
correct date is not mentioned in adjusting ledger entry .
it is an adjustive device that allows remedial instruction for learners .
has proper adjustment been made ?
the body will soon make adjustment to the new drug .
please send adjustment account to the director for his comments .
please pass adjustment by transfer soon .
adjustment mechanism is a tough procedure to understand .
adjustment of account is generally done at the time of preparing final accounts .
adjustment on paper can be made use of any time .
adjustment on paper is a theoretical exercise to understand things .
make adjustment register .
details of adjustment transaction should be kept separately .
he is using adjust text mode for this purpose .
PilotEdit will adjust text encoding automatically when we copy / paste in text mode .
he is an adjutant army officer .
the head of the state &apos; s national guard , the adjutant general , is a statewide elected official .
Freund &apos; s complete adjuvant
her ad lib got her into a sever trouble in life .
add salt to it ad - lib .
add salt to it ad - libicum .
he repeated physical exercise ad libitum
the plot on which Resort is located should admeasure at least 10000 sq . mtrs
the people were asked to roughly admeasure the length of the vessel .
the govt is going to acquire admeasuring 5000 square feet land for the execution of project
he is admin on this computer .
in absence of evidence adminicular evidence works as original documents for legal proceedings
the company was administered by the government .
he administered duties to his subordinates .
for maintaining consistent performance of work and influencing others , administer is required properly
each school is administered separately by a management committee
administer these vaccines via IM ( intramuscular ) route to the employees
a federal agency needs to administer with new regulations for the establishment
the orders have been given on how to administer the fund .
the five star resort would administer new set of regulations .
the doctor administered the drug in the individual who complained of food poisoning .
Union Territories are administered by the President through an Administrator appointed by him / her
the Court may make an order that the debtor &apos; s estate be administered in a summary manner if the property amount does not exceed five hundred
administered price is the main reason for loss .
administered structure of interest now has become irrelevant in the wake of globalisation .
separate administering authority has been established for National Capital Zone .
a person has capacity to hold property if such a person is capable of administering the property effectively and efficiently with ordinary prudence
the firm should have administer justice according to law being in force
the prime minister was administered the oath of his post .
the commanding officer of any military or air force station is administered to take an oath or affirmation within the limits of the station
a concerts with B a plan for poisoning C It is agreed that A shall administer the poison
interrogatories may also be administered by a party to his opponent to facilitate the proof of his own case
any superior authority can administer a warning to an official working under it
the administration of governmental organization is not well organised .
he claims that the present administration of an association is corrupt and the governance is responsible to its members
the doctor has the right of administration of that drug .
the Vernacular Education Committee emphasized the need for more efficient administration and control of primary education
the Labour Officer looks after all matters relating to labour relations with the administration and publicity in the division .
appointed and declared guardian by the court presents administration bond in respect of the property of the ward
in case of amalgamation the amalgamate organization is committed the administration to the amalgamating organization .
the state govt . through a resolution delegates powers of grant of administration , in respect of sales tax to commissioner of sales tax
the court having probate jurisdiction , grants a letter of administration to the grantee for the administration of estate
Civil and Criminal Justice administration by Courts of law has assumed a significant role in modern times
implementation of administration of export promotion is satisfactory .
Finance ministry looks after the proper administration of funds .
a committee has been formed for administration of justice .
administration of the medical benefit scheme is one of the welfare measure provided to employees
administration of food and medicine for day and night will be a safeguard against further administration of poison
in situations when a court appoints a person to take care of person or administration of property of a minor or conduct litigation on behalf of the minor , he or she will be a court guardian
administration of rules is not an easy task .
the provisions of the Fifth Schedule shall apply to the administration and control of the Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes in any State other than the States of Assam Meghalaya , Tripura and Mizoram .
Distt . Collector will be responsible for administration of scheme of child welfare .
administration of the scheme of women development has been entrusted to block development officer .
the administration of small loans connected with industries has been entrusted to SIDBI .
Ministry of corporate affairs is primarily concerned with administration of company &apos; s affairs as according to company &apos; s act
it is the duty of the Prime minister to furnish all information relating to the administration of affairs of the union
a probate is the grant of administration of the estate by the court of competent jurisdiction on the basis of Will .
the Union territories are therefore under the domination of direct administration and control of the federal government of India
there shall be a president for the administration of this trust , nominated by the board of Trustees
the Government of India appointed on 24 - 12 - 1987 a Committee connected with the administration of national capital territory
an administration suit can be filed for enforcing the obligations under the will
administrative system should be made stronger .
the officer is in charge of executing administrative powers .
every minister usually possesses an administrative ability .
administrative Account is an independent body .
in a company , administrative affairs is responsible for the supervision and coordination of all the financial &amp; business affairs
administrative Approval is necessary before release .
administrative Audit exam is already over .
administrative authority is entitled for expenses more than ten thousand .
administrative block is located in front of main entrance of the university .
administrative building is located in front of main entrance of the university .
recruitment is on for administrative cadre .
the Managing Director of a company is in a managerial and administrative capacity so he is not a “ worker ”
Collector is also in charge of law and order administration in the district
there is need for administrative control .
please redistribute work for administrative convenience .
please send a copy of correspondence to the administrative department .
the budget estimates of the administrative departments must be submitted to finance department
administrative devices of carrot and stick is an effective tool in the hands of administrative authority to manage staff .
in an Administrative domain all hosts , routers , network or networks share common security features .
please give suggestions for reduction in administrative expenses .
you should have effective administrative experience in guiding and managing research faculty
all the cabinet ministers were invited for an administative function .
please consult administrative head for this case .
the administrative headquarters of Udaipur districts is being renovated .
please send clear analysis of new rules for administrative implication .
all the adminisrative staff was asked to be present on the day of administrative inspection .
administrative Instruction has been released .
Govt . provides administrative Instructions for implementation of the Provisions of law
the rule was administratively imposed .
the high court is not administratively subordinate to the Supreme Court
in management studies Administrative management domain is an important discipline .
administrative measures were taken against the corrupted manager .
the administrative ministry for this organisation is finance ministry .
the administrative office is being shifted to the new building .
a administrative officer is responsible for administrative management of private , public or governmental corporations
a methodology for supporting administrative operation process , may be designed and developed as per requirement ,
in manual of a particular department Administrative operator stations are mentionened .
administrative powers are found in every sphere of public administration , including town and country planning , the regulation of public health and other environmental matters
Petroleum products are subject to administrative price management .
administrative revenue has shown increasing trend during the last 3 years .
administrative sanction has been given .
IAS officers hold key positions in the government both at the Centre and in the states
the Administrative Staff College of India is a pioneer in the field of post experience management development and training
this webpage helps to understand the administrative structure of JNU .
administrative support system also provides customer support representatives able to handle office procedures .
current administrative system is very slow .
administrative tribunals resolve disputes between the citizen and an officer of a government agency
the District is the Principal Administrative unit below the state level
a hospital administator was corrupt .
in public administration , administrator should be descriptive - cum - normative in character
the State Government may appoint a Deputy or Deputies to assist the Administrator - General
Union Territories are administrated by the President acting to such extent , as he thinks fit , through an Administrator appointed by him
the widow brought an action in her personal capacity as administratrix of the estate
the responses of the children were admirably normal .
Admiral , the Chief of Naval Staff is the senior most rank in Indian Navy
the admiral of the ship showed the tourists how the ship is being operated .
Indian Navy does not have Admiral of the Fleet
admiralty law ( maritime law ) includes accidents and injuries at sea
admiralty law ( maritime law ) includes accidents and injuries at sea , maritime contracts
the special jurisdiction of admiralty has a maritime purpose , different from the common law
the belly dancer was the admiration of all the guests .
the tourist who visit the place admire it to the fullest .
admissibility of given witness is doubtful .
for the exemption in income tax , admissibility of education allowance is just rs . 100 / - per child
given clarification is admissible .
a document is considered to be “ admissible ” when it is accepted as evidence in a judicial matter
please present bills of admissible expenditure only .
admissible expenditure can be recharged .
if the aforesaid requirement as a pre - condition is not satisfied , the confession will not become admissible in evidence .
statement to court without affidavit is not admissible as proof in legal proceeding
halting allowance is admissible under rules .
outcome of case depends upon the admission of facts .
current year &apos; s admission for extra seats is complete .
admission of a new partner is a major event in partnership business
admission will be given on the basis of merit of Aptitude Test
the right of admission is reserved with the management of the hotel .
admission or rejection of proof is based on adequacy or insufficiency of information respectively
he presented his research proposal in front of the admision committee .
the admission fees for this course need to be paid by a demand draft .
the garden charges the visitors a small admission fee .
online admission forms are easy to access .
the prison authorities should notify the family of the inmate within five days after admission into prison
the power of the court in relation to the admission of appeal may be exercised by the registrar
admission of facts must be unequivocal , unconditional and relate to the claim wholly
Court may refund the fees when the suit is decided solely on the admission of the parties without any investigation
the court allow such petition for admission that lies in its jurisdiction
the power of the court in relation to the admission of plaints may be exercised by the registrar
a Common Entrance Test ( CET ) is conducted for admission of student to part - time diploma courses
admission of transfer may be conveyed to all concerned .
Parliament may by law admit into the Union , or establish , new States on such terms and conditions as it thinks fit
the admission procedure for this course will start after the declaration of the Central Board of Secondary Education ( CBSE ) results .
admission standards in professional programmers helps in maintenance of professional standards
temporary admission is granted .
information about various admission tests is avaialable on the internet .
admission of five students is granted .
to give admission or not depends upon the jurisdiction of enquiry committee .
we &apos; ll have to vote on whether or not to admit a new member &quot;
the courts can refuse to admit police evidence which has been illegally obtained
the hotel reserves the right to admit individuals .
the resort doesn &apos; t admit children to consume alcohol .
after admit an application in form 49A , PAN card is issued to applicant by the income tax authority
in absence of judge or additional judge , the Registrar , may admit a plaint or reject a plaint for any reason
according to partnership act , An individual below 18years may admit as minor in partnership
every student must display an admit card before entering the examination hall .
the court may admit or deny the genuineness of documents submitted as evidence
Parliament may by law admit into the Union , or establish , new States on such terms and conditions as it thinks fit .
once after admitting the application your case will be stronger .
the court may admits of compensation in money to a party , unable to perform a contract , during suit
hundreds of people were unable to gain admittance to the hall .
admission is granted .
proposal for admission is granted .
Insurance companies pay a specific percentage of the admitted claim for the damages
all cases of admitted debit may be filed in a separate file .
the fact of having received loan amount has been admitted in evidence in the court by the loanee .
he was admittedly the one was was responsible for this tragedy .
according to partnership act , Minors may be admitted to the benefits of partnership
the claim of the plaintiff to the compensation is admitted by the defendant
once admitted to probate , the will becomes a public record , along with subsequent filings submitted to the court
a separate register shall be maintained , for recording the details in respect of documents admitted to registration .
the plaintiff asks the defendant to admit the execution of the promissory note
an Interviewer will always take it positively when you admit the truth
no test or condition shall be imposed as to religious belief or occupation in admitting or appointing members
he was admitted to hall after submitting required documents .
a person needs to admit an address proof for the application of PAN
debtor or creditor who files the petition also admits the proof against the estate of the insolvent
a minor can be admitted to the benefits of a partnership firm with the mutual consent of all other partners
after completion of inspection Chancellor may admit the privileges of the university to the colleges .
an admix solution was injected into the bottle of water .
improper admixture of food - stuffs would be an offence against laws relating to prevention of adulteration of food and drink
it is found the his work is an admixture of creativity and calmness .
a reproving glance was seen on the face of the parent of the child .
the admonishing behavior of the person was admired by the company superiors .
so he continued admonishing the lousy person .
the guide spoke to the tourists in an admonishing way .
the tourist guide admonishingly spoke to the naughty child .
admonition is a bad habit .
an anther is adnate when fixed by its whole length to the filament .
ado ( ActiveX Data Objects ) is useful for a developers to write programs those access data without knowing how the database is implemented .
Adobe acrobat and Reader are commonly used as a way to present information with a fixed layout similar to a paper publication .
Adobe photoshop povides you the facility to edit digital photos in any manner .
Adobe postscript provides you the ability to print visually rich documents reliably .
license won &apos; t be issued to adolescents .
during adolescence the growth is very fast .
this is a typical case of adolescence disorder .
adoption of new rules will help in tight administration .
adoption of the suggestions given in report will help administration .
the committee voted 5 – 1 to adopt the proposal
the best way to know a dog &apos; s traits is to adopt a mature dog
the majority was such that the minority was forced to adopt their principle .
he wanted to adopt an animal from the zoo .
the tourists were asked to adopt the rules given to them by their guide .
the girl was adopted from the Mother Teresa orphanage , when she was eight months
the adopted son has in his new family precisely the same rights as a natural born son
a detailed socio - economic survey of the adopted village will be conducted .
please take signature of adoptee .
HDMI Licensing , LLC has received notification from the respective Adopter that these entities are Affiliates of said Adopter .
adoption took place in traditional manner .
adoption should be legal .
there is fixed procedure for the adoption of children .
adoption of Newtonian mechanics was unquestioned for 200 years
United States has encouraged adoption of children in the public welfare system
to become legal parents of an adopted child , they needed to make an adoption deed .
Sam gave the adoption in to Amanda .
the courtiers questioned little Akbar &apos; s adoption of a succession to the title of the King after Humayun &apos; s demise .
the Congress adopted the text of the proposed amendment .
she took the adoption in from the biological parents of the kid .
the Walkers were his adoptive family .
Allan was the adoptive father of Charlie .
Christie was the adoptive mother of Adam .
Adoptor has to fullfill some formalities .
NGOs will be encouraged to develop and adopt policies consisting minimum standards and codes of conduct
the tourist visiting the temple are seen to adore the goddess .
people gather around the place in order to adore nature .
this season we will adorn the place with beautiful lights .
the temple is known for the statue of Lord gnash with flower adornment .
his hat could not be taken as an article of a mere personal adornment .
he acted as ad - promisor for the arrested person .
he questioned the adquacy of the proof against the accused .
he began his career as an adrema operator .
there is a swelling in adrenal area .
adrenal cortex has been affected .
adrenal gland has been affected .
the amount of adrenaline flowing in the body increased as the individuals started ride .
the legal status of the plot is adrift .
he said that he is not the most adroitly person to carry out this task .
activated charcoal is a good adsorbent .
Adsorption with activated charcoal can eliminate all toxicity .
Adsorption is a process where a solid is used for removing a soluble substance from the water .
they are going to adulate the individual .
an adult has the right to vote .
this adult was caught in fire .
this disease is seen only in adults .
there are millions of adult consumption units in India , which lack sufficient nutrition .
there are millions of adult consumption units in India , which lack sufficient nutrition .
nowadays a lot of NGOs are working on adult education .
the Education Department in India lacks competent adult education officers .
the adult education programme will be helpful in improving their working abilities to achieve the goal .
use of adulterants in food is banned .
to adulterate food items is a punishable offence .
the trader was seen to adulterate food items in order to gain profit .
the person was found guilty as he didn &apos; t adulterate products .
every year adulterated liqueur kills hundreds of people every year in India .
a survey has recently shown that there is a multimillion dollor market of adulterated drug in the entire world .
the court observed the people who possessed adulterated pesticides were liable to punishment .
use of adulterants in food is a criminal offense .
be cautious of adulteration in food items .
the arrested dealers were accused of adulteration of food and drugs .
she had always thougt that her spouse is an adulterer .
adultery is a criminal offense .
he was caught with the charge of adultery .
he was caught with the charge of adultery .
he left to Dubai for work and lived in adultery with another woman there .
adult franchise is present in India .
in a patriarchal society , all decisions in a family are taken by the adult male members .
the Bengalis follow the democratic tradition of involving all the adult members in decision making .
the espionage network of the Bourbons consisted only of adult messengers .
the movie was strictly only for adults .
there is a dearth of adult school teachers in India , which makes the task of adult education in India difficult .
the Soviet Union was the first country to proclaim adult suffrage not only for men , but also women .
census data consider an able 15 - 60 year person as an adult worker .
all states have decided the proposal to levy ad valorem tax .
an ad valorem tariff was imposed on the items shopped by the individual .
an ad valorem tariff was imposed by the custom officials .
please take advance for tour .
advance against contract is unacceptable .
please adjust the advance amount in the bill .
the usurer advanced five thousand rupees to the peasant as loan before the season of sowing .
